---
title: Small Topical Studies- Part 3 
---





### **1. Judging Others** 

judging-others

Judging others unrighteously usually means looking down on others as if one was better (though this may not always be involved). That is a terrible sin in and of itself and best avoided at all costs. However, there tend to be misunderstandings on this topic. It is not uncommon to hear many people say, “*don’t judge*,” or “*don’t judge me*.” That isn’t necessarily wrong, nor is it necessarily correct. This issue depends on certain factors. We Christians must judge both good and bad things biblically. We are supposed to evaluate situations, circumstances, beliefs, teachings, and even people. Jesus said, “*Stop judging by mere appearances, but instead, judge correctly*” (**John 7:24**). Believers have to make judgment calls all the time because many situations requiring us to choose the right course of action demand discernment and proper perception. These are good things that we should never discourage people from exercising as long as they go about it properly with pure motives. 

Let us be clear that we should never intentionally look for opportunities to judge because those chances will come independently. We should never go on a “witch hunt” and try to find fault in people purposefully because we should only judge when we need to. Our time here on earth is too short for us to go sticking our noses into other matters or, worse yet, other people’s business when we shouldn’t. That is sinful (**1 Timothy 5:13; 1 Thessalonians 4:11; 2 Thessalonians 3:11**). The time to make a proper call will become evident and apparent when we exercise discernment and walk by the Spirit (**Galatians 5:25; Philippians 1:9-10**). Therefore, judging others must entail all we have listed below, most of which correspond with the fruits of the spirit. 

<u>**1. If we judge, what we speak must be true. It must be based on facts, not an opinion (even though we may have opinions) that is not entirely sure of itself or correct.**</u>  

{{% scripture p="Ephesians 4:15 (ESV)" %}} 

**15** Rather, **speaking the truth** in love, we are to grow up in every way into him who is the head, into Christ,                                                             

{{% /scripture %}} 

{{% scripture p="John 7:24 (ESV)" %}} 

**24** Do not judge by appearances, but **judge with right judgment**.”                           

{{% /scripture %}} 

<u>**2. If we judge, we must do so with love and through pure motives.**</u>

See Ephesians 4:15 above ^. 

**3. <u>If we judge, we must do so without hypocrisy.</u>** 

{{% scripture p="Matthew 7:1-5 (ESV)" %}} 

“Judge not, that you be not judged. **2** For with the judgment you pronounce you will be judged, and with the measure you use it will be measured to you. **3** Why do you see the speck that is in your brother's eye, but do not notice the log that is in your own eye? **4** Or how can you say to your brother, ‘Let me take the speck out of your eye,’ when there is the log in your own eye? **5** You hypocrite, first take the log out of your own eye, and then you will see clearly to take the speck out of your brother's eye.                                                                            

{{% /scripture %}} 

**4. <u>Some judgment calls may be suitable for some but not others. That is a big one! One person makes a decision that they feel is right for them, and it isn’t wrong or sinful in any way. Another person chooses to do the opposite of the other person while not committing a single sin. There are many areas of application in the Christian life where choices will differ. We must not be legalistic and condemn others for doing perfectly fine things. Cults and legalists love to do this. Nor should we judge those for doing something fine but wrong to them in their conscience. Examples of situations like these are found in the passages below.</u>**

{{% scripture p="Romans 14:1-9 (ESV)" %}} 

As for the one who is weak in faith, welcome him, but not to quarrel over opinions. **2** One person believes he may eat anything, while the weak person eats only vegetables. **3** Let not the one who eats despise the one who abstains, and let not the one who abstains pass judgment on the one who eats, for God has welcomed him. **4** Who are you to pass judgment on the servant of another? It is before his own master that he stands or falls. And he will be upheld, for the Lord is able to make him stand. **5** One person esteems one day as better than another, while another esteems all days alike. Each one should be fully convinced in his own mind. **6** The one who observes the day, observes it in honor of the Lord. The one who eats, eats in honor of the Lord, since he gives thanks to God, while the one who abstains, abstains in honor of the Lord and gives thanks to God. **7** For none of us lives to himself, and none of us dies to himself. **8** For if we live, we live to the Lord, and if we die, we die to the Lord. So then, whether we live or whether we die, we are the Lord's. **9** For to this end Christ died and lived again, that he might be Lord both of the dead and of the living.            

{{% /scripture %}} 

For more information on the above, please see the link below. 

[**Christian Liberty**](/topical/christian-liberty/) 

With all the above said, what is the judgment referred to in Matthew 7:1?

{{% scripture p="Matthew 7:1 (ESV)" %}} 

“Judge not, that you be not judged.                                                                             

{{% /scripture %}} 

The bad type of judgment above stems from an exaggerated view of oneself as better and more important than others (hence we mentioned judging with pure motives and attitude earlier). This mentality is not the way of love and constitutes a terrible sin which God will repay, whether at the judgment seat for believers or the great white throne for unbelievers. We will explain verses three and five to close. 

{{% scripture p="Matthew 7:3-5 (ESV)" %}} 

**3** “Why do you look at the speck of sawdust in your brother’s eye and pay no attention to the plank in your own eye? **4** How can you say to your brother, ‘Let me take the speck out of your eye,’ when all the time there is a plank in your own eye? **5** You hypocrite, first take the plank out of your own eye, and then you will see clearly to remove the speck from your brother’s eye.                                                     

{{% /scripture %}} 

The interpretation of these final three verses is relatively simple. First, we should constantly evaluate ourselves to ensure we have taken care of our own problems through spiritual growth to help others with what we used to struggle with consistently. You can’t help someone else if you need help yourself. The blind cannot lead the blind (**Matthew 15:14**). 

It is most unfortunate that so many in the church have taken two extremes in this area of Christian application. First, you have some who don’t want to be accountable for themselves to continue to do whatever they want wherever they wish. They may act hypocritically by calling others “judgmental” and “legalistic” when what those people are doing is the right and biblical thing for them to do. So they get falsely and unfairly accused of doing something they aren’t doing. A righteous judgement spoken in love should never be criticized (assuming it is true). 

On the other hand, some falsely and legalistically judge others. They would be doing the opposite of good and righteous regarding everything we have listed above. We must do unto others as we would have them do unto us (**Luke 6:31**). Therefore, let us all strive to judge as our Lord would have us. Let us put Him first in our thoughts, words, and actions toward everyone (**Titus 3:1-11**). 



### **2. Demon Possession- Past and Present-Satanic Attacks** 

demon-possession-past-and-present-satanic-attacks

Demon possession still occurs today in our modern world. However, we will get to that a little bit further below. First, we need to clarify that believers cannot suffer from demon possession because they have the indwelling Holy Spirit. This truth does not mean that we can’t suffer a demonic attack in other ways (Satan and his followers will challenge and oppose every bit of growth, progress, and production we believers make in this life). But that is not the same thing as having demons inside us controlling much of what we do. Nothing in Scripture even remotely suggests that Christians can suffer demonic control of the kind described in the New Testament. 

On the other hand, we mentioned that demons can and will still attack believers by opposing their godly conduct. No surprise because Satan and his legions have tried for many years (ever since the temptation and downfall of Adam and Eve) to thwart the plan and purpose of God. Since Christ’s arch enemy hates our Lord, he hates his followers as well and will stop at nothing to convince them to turn around and give up on their faith. Unbelievers (the world) also consist of Satan’s followers (**John 15:18**). And even for many of them who don’t hate believers now, their love toward Christ’s flock will change by growing cold during the tribulation (**Matthew 24:10-12**). It is easier to love people during good times. But it is often a different story during bad times when push comes to shove.  

We must not give in to the desires of the evil one! It is not uncommon for believers to fall for the lie that many or all dark spiritual attacks are aimed at them individually, purposely, and intentionally. Too many Christians mistake so much of the satanic opposition they face as “personal matters.” In other words, they take it personally when they shouldn’t. This kind of evil resistance that comes our way is a good thing because it signifies that we are doing our job to the Lord as we should. “*Indeed, all who desire to live a godly life in Christ Jesus will be persecuted*” (**2 Timothy 3:12**). 1 Corinthians 10:13 states, “*No temptation has overtaken you except what is **common to mankind**. And God is faithful; he will not let you be tempted beyond what you can bear. But when you are tempted, he will also provide a way out so that you can endure it*.” We also have it from **1 Peter 5:8-9** that our family of believers worldwide are undergoing the same kind of sufferings that we are. Therefore, we are not alone in this struggle and should never take it personally. 

The devil and his forces can attack us in many ways. They are so many and mysterious that it would be impossible to list and examine every single one. But we need to understand that even though Satan may take different angles and approaches with his attacks, a temptation is still a temptation. Yes, some will be harder than others due to their nature, timing, and circumstances. But the solution to the problem remains the same every time- “*Submit yourselves, then, to God. Resist the devil, and he will flee from you*” (**James 4:7**). There is no temptation too great for us to overcome. And although no two are precisely the same, they all still have in common the fact they are temptations that we can overcome every time. 

I (the writer) do believe Satan can attack us in our dreams. And, of course, we could label distraction from reading our Bibles and prayer as “demonic attack” to some degree because those are definite possibilities. But we can’t necessarily confirm this, even if that is what occurred. The problem with many Christians who have undergone some strange “experience” (dream, vision, etc.) is that they tend to try to read into their experiences far too much to the point where they over-involve and obsess about it. Even worse is when we try to interpret what we underwent to begin to act on our “perception” of what went on. When we have experiences like this (demonic or not), it is best to forget them and move on. If anything, they should cause us to take our walk with the Lord more seriously, not do ourselves harm by going the opposite direction through dangerous involvement with evil forces. And of course, (pretty common sense) believers should never involve themselves in witchcraft, ghost hunting, sorcery, or anything of this sort. Paul gives a strong warning that those who practice these things will not inherit the kingdom of heaven (**Galatians 5:19-21**). For more information on this topic, please see the link below. 

[**Cryptozoology and the Bible**](/topical/cryptozoology-and-the-bible/) 

With all the above said, let us now address the statement we made at the beginning of this comment, “*Demon possession still occurs in our modern world*.” This statement is most likely true but with some differences. Firstly, demonic possession may occur differently than it did in Jesus’s day in more subtle, “under the radar” ways. In Biblical times, demons would “go” to people and possess them. Today, it is more common for people to reverse this phenomenon and “go” to demons themselves through manufactured drugs, methods, procedures, practices, and rituals. 

First, this writer is not saying that demons can’t possess unbelievers as they did during biblical times by taking the initiative. That is a possibility though possibly far less common today. The demonic possession we speak of here occurs through the use of shamanic drugs and other methods. In **Cryptozoology and the Bible**, I wrote the following on this subject- 

*People reportedly contact aliens ( known as demons) and are “abducted”/possessed by them telepathically through shamanic drugs. This phenomenon is a modern version of demonic possession. Mclean also notes that contactees and abductees are demonically attacked and "subjected to humiliating and painful procedures to satisfy the desires of their abductors." This is something that most in the church would find hard to accept, but the Bible nowhere tells us that this can’t or doesn’t occur. So no believer has any right to automatically dismiss such occurrences and say that "the Bible doesn't support such strange behavior in our times." True, but it neither says that it DOESN'T occur either. But we know that satanic activity is alive and well for sure. Demonic possession/(unbelievers mistake this for alien abductions) does occur in our modern world in more different, subtle/less obvious ways.* 

Finally, I also stated (while quoting the author involved therein) the following- 

*Additionally, Jason Mclean notes that such demonic possession, as described above, would cease when the victims would call upon the name of Jesus. In his book, he writes that “The CE4 Research Group has recorded over 400 cases of individuals who were experiencing abductions and “alien” contacts only to have them ended by calling on the name of Jesus, and this group is by no means alone or unique.” Why is that? Because demons are afraid of God; we know why that is.* (Jason Mclean- How UFOs & Bigfoot Prove the Bible is True. Page numbers not provided)

{{% scripture p="James 2:18-19 (ESV)" %}} 

**18 But someone will say, “You have faith and I have works.” Show me your faith apart from your works, and I will show you my faith by my works.19** You believe that God is one; you do well. **Even the demons believe—and shudder**!                             

{{% /scripture %}} 

*Even if those people who cried out to God for help because of the torture they were undergoing never got saved, I doubt it makes any difference to the demons. Just mentioning the name “Jesus” or “God,” in this writer's opinion, is enough to scare away all satanic forces, regardless of whether the person had a salvation experience or not. Fallen angels are terrified of Jesus Christ!*              

Hopefully, all this explains the statement I made above. The best thing for believers to do is acknowledge the spiritual realities around them so that these things do not shock us (as they will do to many during the tribulation) and cause many to turn away from the faith. After we acknowledge them, we can move on and worry about them no longer as if they weren’t even there. As mentioned in the paper in the link above, many unbelievers (including apostates) will undoubtedly fall for the lie that the beast, false prophet, and all the world’s possibly half-human, half demonic world leaders alive at that time (during the tribulation) are extraterrestrial. As Servants of God, we know better than to fall for rubbish like this. Our job is to focus on and complete the mission Christ has assigned us to accomplish through spiritual growth, progress, and production. As followers of Christ, we know what we need to do.        



### **3. Fasting**          

fasting

The Bible nowhere requires believers to fast. It is a good activity (we will mention the advantages below) but not something we have to engage in as if it was a command we have to follow. However, Scripture does paint it in a good light because it has many spiritual benefits. But we must be wary not to judge and look down on those who choose not to abstain from eating for specific intervals of time (**Colossians 2:16-23; Romans 14:1-8**). In other words, this activity does not make any believer better than another. 

Fasting is not so much about abstaining from food as it is putting more of our focus and attention on God. That is what fasting is all about, temporarily putting away earthly needs to focus and rely on the spiritual provisions of our heavenly Father. That is the sole purpose of this biblical activity. And we must be careful not to take it too far (going without food for too long can harm the body). It would be unwise to intentionally mimic the fast Jesus underwent during His time in the wilderness (**Luke 4:1-2**). 

Especially relevant to our discussion is the purpose and motivation behind why we do what we do. For example, we are not to fast to look good in front of others and show everyone we are good Christians better than they are; that is judgementalism (**Matthew 7:1-2; Luke 18:10-13**). The Pharisees habitually disfigured their faces so that others would notice their fasting and respect it all the more (**Matthew 6:16-18**). But fasting (like prayer) is a personal matter between us and the Lord. 

Now we will briefly examine the primary benefits of biblical fasting. It is not about us, but our dear Lord, and Savior.  

**1.** Abstaining from food (especially larger meals) makes us feel more awake, alert, and energetic. It is not uncommon to feel sleepy after a meal because our body has to work harder to digest everything we have ingested. When we feel more awake and alive, our willpower to resist sin and study the Word is greater. This greater physical, mental, and spiritual energy will allow us to devote more fulfilling time to the Lord. However, just because we may feel tired after a meal doesn’t excuse us to sin. No matter the circumstances, we can overcome any temptation that comes our way. And fasting is no guarantee we will put our foot down with temptation and say, “NO!” Overcoming sin requires a free-will decision relying on the power of the Holy Spirit and has nothing to do with whether we eat or not. 

**2.** The Bible often associates fasting with humble worship (**Matthew 6:16-18; Acts 13:2; Luke 5:33-39**). But, like music, it is just another option we can employ to worship God. The best and most important way to worship the Lord is through how we live and conduct our lives. 

**3.** Scripture associates fasting with humble repentance, contrition, grief, and remorse (**Joel 2:12; Psalm 69:10; Luke 5:33-39**). Matthew 6:18 describes it as a rewardable deed.  However, our Lord does not require this from us whenever we have erred or fallen into a bad lifestyle for some time.       

**4.** Fasting often occurred during difficult times and right before hard decisions were made (**Ezra 8:23; Daniel 10:3; Acts 14:23**). But, again, this is not required of believers today. Stating otherwise is legalism. 



### **4. Communion**

communion

 Communion is a valid command from our Lord (“*do this in remembrance of me”*) that the church should continue practicing (**Luke 22:18-20**) because it is a way for believers to proclaim the Lord’s death until His return in a manner that demonstrates our faith in the spiritual death of our Lord (that is what the blood represents). The bread symbolizes Christ’s body (who He is), and the wine, His blood (our redemption). Communion is an acknowledgement of our faith in Jesus Christ. Passages that mention it directly include **Matthew 26:26-29, Mark 14:22-25, Luke 22:15-20, 1 Corinthians 10:14-22, 1 Corinthians 11:17-34**). However, it is often misunderstood. 

For one thing, it matters little where and when we do it because all that is not as important as that we do it (as long as our motives and attitude are pure). What do we mean by this? Well, we can do it as many times as we want. Additionally, this practice has nothing to do with who we do it with but everything to do with what goes on in our hearts (**1 Corinthians 11:27-29**). What matters is that we don’t sin while we partake and remember what our Lord did for us on the cross, hence the bread to represent His body and the grape juice or wine to symbolize His blood. Communion is something we can do independently, assuming we have no choice. The presence of other believers has nothing to do with the effectiveness of good prayer, reflection, and meditation. We don’t technically need other people with us to celebrate communion for Christ’s sacrifice to mean anything to us. 

However,  we can do it with other believers in a congregation, which is the better option if we can afford it. And we shouldn’t contemplate Christ’ s death only when we practice this. Instead, we should make it our goal to remember what Christ did for us every day as often as possible. So it is not supposed to be a “one day a month” or “every two weeks” affair only, but an ongoing experience we dally with in our hearts at all times. 

Common meals are another excellent option we can employ to remember our Lord’s death. Jesus never said how and when we could celebrate it (as in, when where, and how). As already stated, participating in a gathering of believers is the first and best choice. But we don’t have to confine the Lord’s supper to just that alone. We can pray, break bread, and partake of the symbolic beverage at our diner tables. The more, the better! 

Something we need to address here is, “who does our Lord want to participate in communion?” The answer is everybody! Jesus told His disciples to do it in remembrance of Him and pass the practice down to the church they would establish later on. The question we must pose is, “*Why would anyone not want to remember what Christ did for them*?” When we partake of the “Lord’s supper,” we proclaim His death until He comes (**1 Corinthians 11:26**). It is a legitimate teaching passed down from our Lord to His disciples and then the church (**1 Corinthians 11**). And because of its spiritual significance, it is more than just a ceremonial tradition. 

Now that we have mentioned everything above let us briefly examine some of the passages that speak of the Lord’s supper. First, we will read Luke 22:16-20, which will speak for and explain the other two instances of communion described in Matthew and Mark. Therefore, we will only examine Luke’s account because that is all that is necessary. Additionally, we will take a look at some other famous passages that involve the Lord’s supper, including its abuse (**1 Corinthians 11:20-22; 27-34**).   

{{% scripture p="Luke 22:16-20 (NIV)" %}} 

**16** For I tell you, I will not eat it again until it finds fulfillment in the kingdom of God.” **17** After taking the cup, he gave thanks and said, “Take this and divide it among you. **18** For I tell you I will not drink again from the fruit of the vine until the kingdom of God comes.” **19** And he took bread, gave thanks and broke it, and gave it to them, saying, “This is my body given for you; do this in remembrance of me.” **20** In the same way, after the supper he took the cup, saying, “This cup is the new covenant in my blood, which is poured out for you.                                     

{{% /scripture %}} 

**VS 16-18**

Jesus referred to the millennial feast or wedding supper of the lamb after the tribulation’s close (**Revelation 19:7-10**) as when He would partake of the bread and cup at the millennial supper.

**VS 19-20** 

Our Lord gives the command to His disciples to continue this new ritual which represents and is symbolic of His body (which was given for us) and His blood (which was shed for the remission of sins). Jesus’s blood was the new covenant, which meant that circumcision did not continue or that water baptism did not become the sign of the new covenant. Jesus’s blood was that sign and the fulfillment of the old and the beginning of the new.  

With the above said, do we literally “eat” Christ’s flesh and “drink” His blood? That is not what **John 6:53-58** means (we will not interpret all of it here). The cup and the bread were symbolic of what would happen to Jesus. The fact that communion was instituted and celebrated BEFORE Christ’s death on the cross proves that no physical or spiritual phenomenon occurs when we participate in the Lord's supper. In other words, we don’t drink our Savior’s literal blood or eat His literal flesh any time we eat the bread and drink the cup. There is not one Bible passage that supports this false conclusion. Communion is a ritual of remembrance or “re-presentation” involving elements that represent the body and blood of Christ. The sacrifices of the OT looked forward to this sacrifice of sacrifices. Today, we look back at what Christ did for us, and communion is another way to help us do that. 

John 6:53-58 doesn’t teach that we should or can eat Jesus’s flesh and drink His blood because no one has done that. The Bible doesn’t mention anyone doing that at all. As we explained above, the bread and the beverage of communion do not transform into these. Instead, we “eat” and “drink” Jesus by surrendering our lives to Him through faith by accepting His person and work. Jesus said that He is the bread and water of life, metaphors to describe His eternal nature and the salvation He offered. Whoever believes in Him will live forever. But whoever does not will suffer both physical and spiritual death. Jesus had just fed the 5,000 by providing them physical bread. But what He wanted to give them was spiritual, eternal life through His death on the cross, something the people had to receive through faith. 

It is astonishing how many people have taken something so simple and turned it into silliness. We can only imagine what Jesus and the apostles would think if they were here to witness all the “mysticism” going around in the world today. So many have and continue to make the same mistakes that Israel made when they misunderstood what Jesus said about Himself. In John 6:63, our Lord said that “*The Spirit gives life; the flesh counts for nothing. The words I have spoken to you-they are full of the Spirit and life*.” 

**1 Corinthians 11:20-22** 

{{% scripture p="1 Corinthians 11:20-22" %}} 

**20** So then, when you come together, it is not the Lord’s Supper you eat, **21** for when you are eating, some of you go ahead with your own private suppers. As a result, one person remains hungry and another gets drunk. **22** Don’t you have homes to eat and drink in? Or do you despise the church of God by humiliating those who have nothing? What shall I say to you? Shall I praise you? Certainly not in this matter! 

{{% /scripture %}} 

No one can celebrate communion while committing unconfessed sin. The wealthy believers used their status as an advantage only for themselves but not for others. They were getting drunk and withholding their abundance from those less fortunate than themselves. The “elites” withdrew only with those of similar social and economic status so that they began to exclude those with whom they shared a common faith. What a way to treat one’s spiritual brothers and sisters! The wealthy discriminated against the poor in a discriminatory and selfish fashion while depriving them of food to eat! The Lord’s Supper (if celebrated in church and not at home) is a communal activity, not a case of “*we will eat and drink only when and how we want to*.” Their drunkenness also didn’t make for a good testimony but could turn people away from the faith. It indeed would be better to partake of such activities at their own homes, not in an assembling house church! The gathering was no longer a spiritual matter because it became all about status; a behavior no different than what so many unbelievers prioritized. No wonder Paul was so displeased and would not applaud these sinful acts. 

{{% scripture p="1 Corinthians 11:27-34" %}} 

**27** So then, whoever eats the bread or drinks the cup of the Lord in an unworthy manner will be guilty of sinning against the body and blood of the Lord. **28** Everyone ought to examine themselves before they eat of the bread and drink from the cup. **29** For those who eat and drink without discerning the body of Christ eat and drink judgment on themselves. **30** That is why many among you are weak and sick, and a number of you have fallen asleep. **31** But if we were more discerning with regard to ourselves, we would not come under such judgment. **32** Nevertheless, when we are judged in this way by the Lord, we are being disciplined so that we will not be finally condemned with the world. **33** So then, my brothers and sisters, when you gather to eat, you should all eat together. **34** Anyone who is hungry should eat something at home, so that when you meet together it may not result in judgment. 

{{% /scripture %}} 

Verse twenty-seven describes that we should never take communion while sinning. This passage refers specifically to that point. How one goes into communion can determine the manner in which they handle it. If our hearts are not ready to celebrate the Lord’s atoning sacrifice due to still present sin, then we are more likely to partake of the Lord’s supper in an unworthy manner. Both aspects are important because the “before” time can dictate the “present” time. So there is no issue with translation there. We should always confess any known sins before we partake. And no believer can practice sin during communion because that defeats the whole purpose and insults the grace of God. That doesn’t suggest that we can’t celebrate because we may have forgotten to confess a few sins in the recent past. Our Lord automatically forgives every wrong that slips our radar because we aren’t perfect, meaning our memories will never catch and bring to mind everything we may have done. God’s grace covers every sin we have and will commit, past present, and future. That is still no excuse for sin, which means we know what it is and isn’t. But what matters is that we go into communion with the right attitude of a repentant mindset to approach the Lord worthily. We cannot come to Him while clinging to sin (committing it at that very moment as the believers in our passage were doing). 

Paul exhorts these wealthy believers to examine themselves before they partake of the Lord’s meal. This action would require them to reexamine their hearts and attitudes to align them to the power of the Spirit. You cannot fix a problem if you don’t know or believe you have one. Therefore, these believers needed to rethink how they were going about everything to prevent future sin from hardening their hearts and leading them to fall away from God. **Hebrews 10:26** deliberately warns against negative unchecked behavior because it will continue to kill and corrode faith as it gradually gets worse. Once faith is gone, so is salvation which will bring condemnation and judgment of the worst kind at the great white throne. Paul has those negatively affected by these people in mind and those who caused all the trouble. He is thinking of everyone’s spiritual safety so that they do not develop an evil heart of unbelief, causing them to fall away (**Hebrews 3:12**). That is the more negative judgment they could undergo. But the sentence spoken of in verse twenty-nine specifically refers to physical discipline through sickness and premature death, not eternal death, a fact confirmed by verse thirty. Still, there is a danger for some that may allow sin to harden their hearts and drag them back into a state of unbelief. 

To “*discern the body of Christ*” in verse twenty-nine means to see the importance and significance of the supper itself so as not to handle it with less respect as one would any other meal. But the rich weren’t doing this because they treated it like a joke. 

The Lord used sickness and physical death as a means to discipline this congregation (they were still believers after all). As stated in verse 32, the reason is that they would not” *be finally condemned with the world*.” If a person is condemned **with** the world, then they will spend eternity **with** the world (unbelievers in the lake of fire). Our Lord corrected this negative behavior from these believers so that they would learn the lesson not to continue in sin. 

Verse thirty-three states the principle we mentioned above about communion being a communal meal and not an “every man to his own group” type ordeal. Neglecting others for whom Christ died is total abuse and no worse than insulting the sacrifice of Christ. He died for all men, yet these wealthy Christians acted as if Christ’s sacrifice was all about them only. Even if this wasn’t their internal motives, their actions spoke for themselves. 

Verse thirty-four restates what we have already mentioned above. This does not contradict what we stated that how one does communion isn’t what matters. Some believers may not be able (for whatever reason) to celebrate with others. Also, we can celebrate it as many times as we wish at home because the more the better! The problem was how and why they were going about it as they were. They could have done the Lord’s supper with the poor but chose to discriminate and abuse them to a dangerous level. The issue was attitude and behavior. Some believers can’t find a worthy place to celebrate communion with others due to the dangerously lukewarm state of most churches. Or maybe those in question are older people and shut-ins. There are other possibilities as well. Believers under challenging regions and third-world countries may only have access to online Christian fellowship but nothing suitable nearby in person. Therefore, it is ok for them to celebrate the Lord’s supper alone. After all, they don’t have any other choice. 



### **5. Dealing with Opposition- Christian Suffering**  

dealing-with-opposition-christian-suffering

It is already a prominent and well-known fact that believers will suffer in this life, or is it? Almost everyone who has read through this ministry will know that the church is highly indifferent to the reality of the Christian life. So most believers don’t know what it is like to go through tough times because they seldom face them since they are less of a threat to Satan’s cause. The evil one is more clever than we know and will concentrate most of his efforts on thwarting and destroying the pain-staking work and actions of those who are walking in faith and pursuing the truth as they should. Our enemy does this not because the assaults have anything to do with us personally (as if Satan loves to pick on specific individuals), but because these people live in highest obedience to his arch-enemy, God. 

But we should be pretty familiar with this topic because we have spoken of it a fair bit already. We have also discussed how the Lord uses discipline to keep us safe from the world (**[Overcoming Sin](/topical/overcoming-sin/#6-discipline--gods-loving-way-of-protecting-us)**).  And as we have already stated, the Lord never tempts anyone but tests all of His own instead (**James 1:13-18**). Only Satan tempts believers. But the goal of this brief discussion is to offer a bit of encouragement and additional truths to help us stay on the road and not swerve off into the brush. 

When we suffer from poor mistreatment from others, we should not develop a “martyr syndrome” where we take our eyes off the goal and fall into self-pity. Instead, we need to remember that it is not about us but entirely about our Lord and Savior. Now, that doesn’t mean we have to enjoy or like the process (we know we don’t) but that we should take pains to be joyful because we know the end will emerge better than the beginning (**James 1:2-4**). We know what awaits us at the end of this difficult life and that one day in eternity will be far greater than all the best days we experienced in this world. So when we endure tests and opposition, we accumulate an immense weight of glory and eternal rewards that far outweigh everything we had to undergo while still alive in this spiritual battlefield (**2 Corinthians 4:17; 1 Peter 5:10**). 

Whatever the Lord allows us to endure, we must remember that it is for our good with a positive reason behind it. We must learn to wait patiently (**Isaiah 40:31**) and not give up by throwing our hands up in defeat. Nor should we ever fester anger toward our Savior and allow unrighteous indignation to embitter us toward our greatest advocate. The problem with this type of behavior is that it opens us up to all kinds of terrible spiritual attacks, ones that we shouldn’t necessarily have to endure. Our suffering is already great enough, so do we really want to add to it? Not only that, but each day has enough problems of its own. So why unnecessarily add to what is already there? There will be times where we can’t escape our circumstances because we have no choice but to face them head-on. But we must not forget that we aren’t alone because the One who allows them to occur is also the One who empowers us to get through them intact. “*If God be for us, who can be against us*” (**Romans 8:31**)? 

And not only should we aggressively avoid getting angry at God, but we must resolve not to become embittered toward our enemies or whoever gives us trouble, whether those people are friends or foes. There is a lot of suffering that doesn’t involve people directly. But people can add to the equation just as Job’s friends did in his circumstances. People can and will aggravate us; that is just an unavoidable reality. The sad truth is that these individuals can be friends (as in Job’s case), relatives, and even family members. It doesn’t matter how close and related we are toward others because the Lord and His truth always come first. We just need to make sure we handle ourselves as we should. That doesn’t mean we don’t love the other person(s) and that we don’t say or do anything that needs to be said and done for their benefit. But there will be people we just can’t help or change who will continue to oppose us even if they have good intentions (as Job’s friends did). If they anger us, we must not allow our feelings and emotions to lead us into sin. We follow the Holy Spirit and not our flesh. 

Our Lord set the ultimate example of dealing with opposition from other people. We must exercise self-control and not sin against others through what we say and how we act. The passage below demonstrates this very well. 

{{% scripture p="Matthew 12:15-21 (NIV)" %}} 

**15** Aware of this, Jesus withdrew from that place. A large crowd followed him, and he healed all who were ill. **16** He warned them not to tell others about him. **17** This was to fulfill what was spoken through the prophet Isaiah: **18** “Here is my servant whom I have chosen, the one I love, in whom I delight; I will put my Spirit on him, and he will proclaim justice to the nations. **19** He will not quarrel or cry out; no one will hear his voice in the streets. **20** A bruised reed he will not break, and a smoldering wick he will not snuff out,
 till he has brought justice through to victory. **21** In his name the nations will put their hope.”                                     

{{% /scripture %}} 

We need to allow the Lord to be the judge and the One who will take vengeance on His enemies (**Deuteronomy 32:35-38**). The battle is His, and we wrestle not against flesh and blood (**Ephesians 6:12; 1 Samuel 17:47**). Satan wants us to give in to our negative feelings to compromise our proper walk with the Lord and involve us in the same poor behavior of those who oppose us. If we give into the trap, we join in the same folly and error that the opposition commits. Our love for our enemies will demonstrate our desire to help them through how we engage them when they confront us. Suppose we see someone stuck in the mud. The logical thing to do is to throw a rope or something else to them so they can grab hold and climb out. Do we think that joining them by jumping into the mud pit with them will do any good? Not only did we not help that person, but we potentially made them worse by harming ourselves. 

Satanic opposition (in whatever form) should never take us by surprise because we expect that stuff as Christians. 1 Peter 4:12-14 says, “*Beloved, do not be surprised at the fiery ordeal among you, which comes upon you for your testing, as though something strange were happening to you; **13** but to the degree that you share the sufferings of Christ, keep on rejoicing, so that at the revelation of His glory you may also rejoice and be overjoyed. **14** If you are insulted for the name of Christ, you are blessed, because the Spirit of glory, and of God, rests upon you*. 

However, verses fifteen to nineteen after the context above state, “*Make sure that none of you suffers as a murderer, or thief, or evildoer, or a troublesome meddler; **16** but if anyone suffers as a Christian, he is not to be ashamed, but is to glorify God in this name. **17** For it is time for judgment to begin with the household of God; and if it begins with us first, what will be the outcome for those who do not obey the gospel of God? **18** And if it is with difficulty that the righteous is saved, what will become of the godless man and the sinner? **19** Therefore, those also who suffer according to the will of God are to entrust their souls to a faithful Creator in doing what is right.* 

Anytime we do wrong, we can only expect the Lord’s discipline to follow our sinful deeds (**Hebrews 12:4-12**). There is no worse time to pity oneself than after bringing all the pain and suffering on ourselves. We should never allow any suffering in our lives because of disobedience, which only adds to what we go through. But as Hebrews 12 states, all legitimate heirs of Christ receive discipline because all believers sin, and chastisement is a sign that we belong to God. Why would unbelievers receive a “spanking” if they are not God’s children? 

Nevertheless, the Lord pardons all those who seek His forgiveness. After all, His blood covered all our sins, past, present, and future. Therefore, our Lord automatically forgives everything we forget to confess based on what He (not we) has done for us. 

To sum up, nothing in this life lasts forever. Trials and tribulations of various lengths will come and go, whether they last for a few days, months, or even years. But we can be sure that the Spirit will always remain in us as long as we believe in guiding and directing our every thought, word, and deed. He will never leave or forsake us (**Hebrews 13:5**) and will empower us to overcome all obstacles. Since we have such a great advocate, let’s rise to the challenge in the Lord’s strength by entrusting ourselves to a faithful Creator.  

{{% scripture p="Matthew 12:1-4 (NIV)" %}} 

Therefore, since we are surrounded by such a great cloud of witnesses, let us throw off everything that hinders and the sin that so easily entangles. And let us run with perseverance the race marked out for us, **2** fixing our eyes on Jesus, the pioneer and perfecter of faith. For the joy set before him he endured the cross, scorning its shame, and sat down at the right hand of the throne of God. **3** Consider him who endured such opposition from sinners, so that you will not grow weary and lose heart.                                                                          

{{% /scripture %}} 



### **6. The church has not Replaced Israel** 

the-church-has-not-replaced-israel

Romans chapter eleven clarifies that the church and Israel (Jews) are one and the same. Indeed, the nation of Israel began long before the time of the Gentiles consisting of the past two thousand years. But the church consists of all born again believers ever since Adam and Eve up to our present time. So the first believers were gentiles, not Jews or Israelites. But the Lord went on to choose a people that would spread His name, beginning with Abraham and his descendants. So Romans eleven isn’t stating that the Jews were the first converts, but that they were the first chosen group of people to act as ambassadors for Christ here on earth. Jesus was the rock and foundation of the church, and He was Jewish. Therefore, the church was still founded by Jews, not Gentiles. As mentioned in Romans, there is much advantage of being a Jew from Israel (**Romans 3:1-2; Romans 1:16; 2:9; 2:10**). But not all Israel is true Israel, a fact discerned by faith because only those who believe in Jesus Christ are the true “chosen ones” of God. Since God chose Israel to be the apple of His eye, how can unbelieving Israelites constitute the chosen? Only believers fall in this category.  

Romans 9:25-26 states- ***25** as He also says in Hosea:“I will call those who were not My people, ‘My people,’ And her who was not beloved, ‘beloved.’” **26** “And it shall be that in the place where it was said to them, ‘you are not My people,’ There they shall be called sons of the living God.”*

The “those” referred to above consist of Gentile believers, who would become more open to the gospel message after most Jews came to reject it. This and Romans eleven tells us that Gentiles have merged with the Jews as part of the church, not separated. 

The church has nothing to do with race, genealogy, or time. Instead, it has to do with faith. By definition, a believer believes and keeps believing in the Lord Jesus Christ. So the church has always existed, even though we refer to the past two thousand years as the “church era” and “the time of the Gentiles.” Every member of God’s family has faith in common. So it doesn’t matter whether one is a Jew because rejecting the gospel means forfeiting all the blessings and advantages of Jewish heritage. Worse yet, these people will miss out on eternal life only to spend eternity away from God. But all those who put their faith and trust in God’s Son are Abraham’s spiritual seed. So what matters is the spiritual side of this, not the physical. But the Jews remain God’s physically chosen people. The ultimate promises made to Israel will see their fulfillment during and after the tribulation yet future, not before it. Therefore, Israel is a unique part of the church, not a separate category. 

Gentiles have not replaced Israel but have only joined the church, which consists of all believers. And one more thing we need to mention here is that Jews, not Gentiles, founded the church and wrote the Bible we have today. So how could it be that Jews could not be a part of something they founded and established? Jesus is a Jew, and He alone founded the church! 

The book of Ephesians solves this whole issue for us by reconciling both Jews and Gentiles un bringing them together. 

{{% scripture p="Ephesians 2:11-22 (NASB)" %}} 

**11** Therefore remember that previously you, the Gentiles in the flesh, who are called “Uncircumcision” by the so-called “Circumcision” *which is* performed in the flesh by human hands— **12** *remember* that you were at that time separate from Christ, excluded from the people of Israel, and strangers to the covenants of the promise, having no hope and without God in the world. **13** But now in Christ Jesus you who previously were far away have been brought near by the blood of Christ. **14** For He Himself is our peace, who made both *groups into* one and broke down the barrier of the dividing wall, **15** by abolishing in His flesh the hostility, *which is* the Law *composed* of commandments *expressed* in ordinances, so that in Himself He might make the two one new person, *in this way* establishing peace; **16** and that He might reconcile them both in one body to God through the cross, by it having put to death the hostility. **17** And He came and preached peace to you who were far away, and peace to those who were near; **18** for through Him we both have our access in one Spirit to the Father. **19** So then you are no longer strangers and foreigners, but you are fellow citizens with the saints, and are of God’s household, **20** having been built on the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Christ Jesus Himself being the cornerstone, **21** in whom the whole building, being fitted together, is growing into a holy temple in the Lord, **22** in whom you also are being built together into a dwelling of God in the Spirit.                                                               

{{% /scripture %}} 

{{% scripture p="Romans 9:30 (NASB)" %}} 

**30** What shall we say then? That Gentiles, who did not pursue righteousness, attained righteousness, but the righteousness that is by faith;                                

{{% /scripture %}} 

The only reason we call the current period “the time of the Gentiles” is because more of them are currently coming to Christ. This trend will reverse during and after the Tribulation when Israel retakes the leading role. And there is no passage in Scripture that in any way states that Gentiles have replaced Jews or that Israel and the church exist as two separate entities. They are both the same. Israel is simply a unique part of Christ’s body of believers. 

The Greek New Testament term for “church” is *ekklesia* (ἐκκλησία) which comes from the verb “to call” and the preposition “out of.” As **Robert D. Luginbill** states,  “*this is the same word used for the assembly of enfranchised citizens in the classical Greek city-states. These notions of special selection and special privilege can also be seen in the adjectival form eklektos, cognate in form and meaning with the Latin word from which our English "elect" is derived. That the Church is thus properly the universal assembly of all who choose to faithfully follow Jesus Christ during the first six millennia of human history, a chosen few (by grace through faith,* [*Eph.2:8-9*](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/Eph.2.8-9)*), an elect group called by God out of the devil's world and into His own family, is a truth not only supported throughout the New Testament (cf.* [*Matt.22:14*](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/Matt.22.14)*;* [*Rom.8:33*](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/Rom.8.33)*;* [*1Cor.1:27*](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/1 Cor.1.27)*;* [*1Thes.1:4*](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/1 Thess.1.4)*;* [*1Pet.1:1*](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/1 Pet.1.1)*;* [*Rev.17:14*](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/Rev.17.14)*), but consistent with the picture given by the Old Testament as well, where ekklesia is the standard translation for Israel's assembly (**קהל**), the qahal.”* 

And finally, he writes, 

*Central to the idea of our "election" is the purpose for it. For we who are elect are so because of Him who is **the** elect, Jesus Christ, and it is for Him that we have been chosen out of the world, to share eternity together with **the** chosen One (compare* [*Is.42:1*](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/Isa.42.1) *with 44:1; and cf.* [*Lk.9:35*](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/Luke.9.35)*;* [*23:35*](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/Lk 23.35)*;* [*1Pet.2:4*](https://biblia.com/bible/nkjv/1 Pet.2.4)*):* 

[*https://ichthys.com/6B-Ecclesio.htm#A._Definition_of_the_Church*](https://ichthys.com/6B-Ecclesio.htm#A._Definition_of_the_Church) 



### **7. Letting Go of the Past- Moving on from Failure, Anger, Stress, Frustration, Fear, and Anxiety. Christians and Suicide** 

letting-go-of-the-past-moving-on-from-failure-anger-stress-frustration-fear-and-anxiety-christians-and-suicide

We’ve all been around people with bad tempers who don’t handle stress too well. The truth is that there are believers who act this way, just as there are unbelievers who do the same. That may sound shocking since those born of God will produce the fruits of the Spirit to some extent, but we should never assume that those who struggle with what we will discuss in this comment are not saved because Christians can struggle with those things too! It is not uncommon, and this author has been around enough of these individuals to know that. The problem is that they are good in some areas while inconsistent in others. We all struggle in different areas. But the issue here is people who allow their struggles to get way out of control to the point where they continuously and consistently harm themselves and others. 

Many people in the church have gone through some harrowing ordeal in the past or had a rough life growing up, explaining their present behavior. Even though this explains it, however, it does not excuse it. There is never an excuse for misconduct and sinful behavior because it all comes down to how we respond to and handle our present and past circumstances. With God, all things are possible (**Philippians 4:13; Luke 1:36-37; Job 42:2**), and if we choose not to exercise faith, we can’t do anything good at all (**Hebrews 11:6**). 

For example, some people experienced harsh treatment and abuse from others when they were younger, so that they allow their anger, hurt, and frustration to get the better of them in difficult times. When times are good, it isn’t as much of an issue. But once the going gets rough, then the ugly side of people begins to emerge. But even less strenuous times won’t always appease those who struggle with anger and past hurts. This point depends on the person in question and how bad a case they suffer. Some people go off like a lightbulb, while others need a little more agitation to set them off. Nonetheless, there is no excuse for any of this behavior. 

So how should believers go about handling their struggling brothers and sisters in Christ?” A reply of “just get over it” is a terrible and unbiblical answer because overcoming these types of difficulties takes time and effort. But, yes, they will take action, something those in question must employ if they ever want to have any hope of winning the fight against the flesh and the devil. 

But before we discuss the solution to this problem more in-depth, let’s make a few clarifications. First, it is not a sin to be angry because what matters is how we handle it. Ephesians 4:26-27 says, “ *Be angry and do not sin; do not let the sun go down on your anger,* ***27** and give no opportunity to the devil*. There is such thing as righteous indignation when appropriate (you take Moses and his anger against the Israelites). Our Lord (who cannot sin) expresses His wrath and displeasure toward those who disobey Him (**Exodus 32:10-11; Deuteronomy 9:8**). In God’s case, people would often provoke Him to anger through unrighteous and rebellious sin. But God is perfect and cannot sin. Ephesians 6:4 commands fathers not to provoke their children to wrath because angry people only encourage more angry people, which is why Proverbs tells us to keep far away from a wrathful person (**Proverbs 22:24-25**). 

However, the issue above is not so much anger but allowing that anger to cause one to sin. No person can remain upset for an overly long period without messing up in some way unless they suppress their feelings and emotions, things we have control over. When confronted with temptation, we don’t dally with whatever provoking thoughts we have in our mind because that always leads to failure. So no one can remain angry for too long without resultant consequences on their thoughts, words, and deeds. That is why Ephesians 4:26 states, “*Do not let the sun go down on your wrath*.” 

In addition to anger, stress and frustration are not wrong by themselves. Our minds and bodies will naturally succumb to both sooner or later because we can only take so much. But this doesn’t mean we have to allow these feelings and conditions (in the case of stress) to cause us to sin. And we have the free-will choice and the power of the Holy Spirit to calm them down, as David cites in Psalm 131:1-2, “*O Lord, my heart is not lifted up; my eyes are not raised too high; I do not occupy myself with things too great and marvelous for me. 2 But I have calmed and quieted my soul, like a weaned child with its mother; like a weaned child is my soul within me*.” And anger and frustration are not the same things. Anger responds to a situation, while frustration is dissatisfaction with a problem or circumstance. 

What applies to anger, stress, and frustration above also goes for fear and anxiety. We all experience both of these negative feelings a good bit throughout our lives. So they aren’t always sinful because it depends on how we handle them. Someone once said that true courage doesn’t mean we aren’t afraid to do something; it means we do the difficult thing even if we are scared. That is true courage; doing the scary thing even with feelings of fear, doubt, and anxiety. Doing takes courage! Maybe we are afraid to talk to a particular person or face our boss and coworkers. Or perhaps we are anxious about a test or handling a stubborn person who refuses to accept the truth we give them. Regardless of the time and circumstances, true courage rises to the challenge by disregarding all the negatives to achieve the positive by doing the right thing. We can dumb feelings down, but we can still do whatever we have to do even with a remanent of our emotions still clinging to us. There will be times when we must obey God under challenging periods (the tribulation is a prime example of this). Some people have no fear, while others do, but what matters is that we do what our commanding Officer commands us to do. Deuteronomy 31:6 states, “*Be strong and of a good courage. Do not fear or be in dread of them, for it is the Lord your God who goes with you. He will not leave you or forsake you*.” **Joshua 1:9** says virtually the same thing. 

The problem with continuous excessive fear and anxiety is that it causes us to become unrealistic pessimists who assume the worst will happen. But it is better to be a realist-optimist where we hope for the best from a realistic perspective. It is better to keep things in the proper scope than to become unrealistic with both extremes (pessimism and optimism). Hope doesn’t mean we expect the easiest path. It means we realize that all things will work together regardless of what happens, even if we must go through great trials and tribulations to get to the better end (**Ecclesiastes 7:8**). 1 Corinthians 13:7 states, “*It (love) always protects, always trusts, always hopes, always perseveres*.” As Christians, we don’t know what lies ahead or what tomorrow will bring (**James 4:14**). Despite this, we ALWAYS and continuously trust in God, ALWAYS hope that everything will work together for good, and ALWAYS persevere no matter what betides. There is no guarantee our circumstances will work out as we want them to, which is why we have to be ready to adjust and endure transitions because they could happen at any time. We have to be careful not to put too much trust in our expectations lest they don’t come true and we despair and get angry at God. Instead, we need to keep the proper mindset of “*If it is the Lord’s will, we will live and do this or that*” (**James 4:13-15**). 

{{% scripture p="Romans 8:28 (KJV)" %}} 

**28** And we know that all things work together for good to them that love God, to them who are the called according to his purpose.                                      

{{% /scripture %}} 

Many people presently operate based on their past fears or their present anxieties. But Jesus is our commander, not our feelings. We may think to ourselves, “*But this happened in the past, so it will probably happen again*”! Or we may consider to ourselves, “*I have a good reason to be upset because of what so and so did to me. Therefore, I have every right to entertain angry and bitter thoughts*.” That is playing with fire! We must not allow other people’s failures to hold us captive like chains by keeping us from moving forward in our spiritual progress. We are to be slow to anger and quick to get rid of it when it does come so that the evil one doesn’t take advantage of the situation. The truth is that it is never a good idea to get mad about something and then stay that way for too long. Anger is not a sin, but vacillating anger that remains leads to wrongdoing. We must choose to surrender our minds to God so that we don’t continue to hurt ourselves and others. 

One of the biggest things we need to remember is that love is not easily angered. And not only that, but **it keeps no record of wrongs** (**1 Corinthians 13:5**). This mentality is not easy to achieve, but we must attain it! If we don’t make an effort, can we ever expect victory? 

 We cannot let the past dictate the present or the future. The past is the past, the present is the present, and the future is the future. We can’t change a single thing positively by worrying (**Matthew 6:27**), nor can we make tomorrow any less stressful by adding to the problem by fretting over the issue (**Matthew 6:34**). Whatever wrong others have done to us, we can rest assured they will have to answer to Christ for their sinful deeds (**Matthew 12:36**). If we stand against this type of behavior and want to put a stop to it, why continue hypocritically doing it ourselves? Just because someone treated us a certain way does not give anyone an excuse to reciprocate that behavior to others as a way of taking out our hurt on different people. If someone slaps us on the cheek, should we slap them back? We know the answer to that question (**Matthew 5:38-40**). Did we dislike the treatment others gave us, wherever and whenever it occurred? Then we need to make sure we do unto others as we would want them to do to us (**Matthew 7:12**). Why should others suffer from us when we don’t have to behave in such a way? Since we can control our thoughts, words, and actions (with the Spirit’s help), we are without excuse and just as guilty as those who provoked us to such behavior. The truth is, nobody drove us to act the way we do; we pushed ourselves to that state. And if we can get ourselves into something, we can (through the Lord’s strength) get ourselves out in the power of the Spirit. It all comes down to free will. 

So unless a person has gone insane to a point where they can’t think and function as they should, nothing excuses them from mistreating others. Whether this person is a Christian husband who beats his wife, an angry man who shouts at others because his father abused or mistreated him in his youth, a person who endured bullying growing up, or an individual with post-traumatic stress disorder, God will hold them all accountable for every wrong they commit. 

Speaking of post-traumatic stress disorder, that is a difficult one. We must be ever so loving and patient with people like this, no questions asked! It is most likely that we have and will never experience what they had to go through (all the more reason to respect and appreciate our military service members past and present). Some people need assistance from medical professionals, especially if there is a danger that they may hurt themselves and others; see the following link for more on that **([Believers and Mental Illness- Antidepressants, Counselors, and Cognitive Behavioral Therapy](/topical/christian-liberty/#f-believers-and-mental-illness--antidepressants-counselors-and-cognitive-behavioral-therapy))**. We must handle people like this with utmost care and sensitivity because their condition makes developing the correct spiritual perspective all that more difficult. Oh, how our Lord and Savior loves them just as He does all men, and we should demonstrate this same love of Christ to a higher degree to those who are hurting. When Jesus said, “*It is not those who are healthy who need a physician, but those who are sick*” He referred to unbelievers (open to the gospel message) without God in their lives. But think of how much love we should demonstrate toward a fellow sibling in Christ who not only hurts spiritually but mentally? If the condition doesn’t get better and even worse, then professional assistance may be necessary, depending on the severity of the disorder. Whichever route the person takes, the Lord WILL work it all out for good so that anyone who truly desires to please their Savior as much as possible regardless of their circumstances will live a fulfilling life for God with a bountiful crop awaiting them in heaven. 

But what about those who give up and fail to trust in the Lord by taking their own lives? It is good to ask whether true believers can commit suicide. I would answer yes because King Saul most likely did during his final battle on Mount Gilboa. We’ll take a look at it below. 

{{% scripture p="1 Samuel 31:1-6 (NKJV)" %}} 

Now the Philistines fought against Israel; and the men of Israel fled from before the Philistines, and fell slain on Mount Gilboa. **2** Then the Philistines followed hard after Saul and his sons. And the Philistines killed Jonathan, Abinadab, and Malchishua, Saul’s sons. **3** The battle became fierce against Saul. The archers hit him, and he was severely wounded by the archers. **4** Then Saul said to his armorbearer, “Draw your sword, and thrust me through with it, lest these uncircumcised men come and thrust me through and abuse me.” But his armorbearer would not, for he was greatly afraid. Therefore Saul took a sword and fell on it. **5** And when his armorbearer saw that Saul was dead, he also fell on his sword, and died with him. **6** So Saul, his three sons, his armorbearer, and all his men died together that same day.                                                               

{{% /scripture %}} 

Not long before the above happened, Samuel told Saul (predicting his future predicament), “*The Lord will deliver both Israel and you into the hands of the Philistines, and tomorrow you and your sons will be with me. The Lord will also give the army of Israel into the hands of the Philistines*” (**1 Samuel 28:19**). Should we take “you and your sons will be with me” as referring to physical death to awaken to spiritual life with Samuel in Abraham’s bosom? Or does it mean that Saul and his sons will join Samuel in the grave (consisting of dirt), which is the destination for all people’s (both believer and unbeliever) bodies? Did Saul die physically only to end up condemned in hell after committing suicide? The former is most likely the correct translation. We know that Saul’s son Jonathan was saved. Therefore, it is most likely that Saul went where Jonathan went (Abrahams's bosom). However, it is still unclear whether “with me” refers to physical death resulting in spiritual life or physical death leading to spiritual life for all men or just some of them. I (the writer) take it to mean physical death ending in spiritual life for Saul and all of his sons. I believe we will see all of them in heaven one day. 

Christians can commit suicide. Believers can only lose salvation through unbelief, not suicide. There is no single passage in Scripture that supports the false idea that suicide for believers leads to hell. On the contrary, the Bible tells us that those who die in faith will enter God’s kingdom. Continuous belief in the Lord Jesus Christ is the only condition for a person to enter the kingdom of heaven, as **John 3:16-18** demonstrates. 

 But the fact that someone kills themself doesn’t speak very well of their faith and demonstrates just how weak it was. There is no excuse for taking one’s life because that is a sin where we attempt to claim ownership of ourselves by taking matters into our own hands out of distrust that God will work things out. **Note**-This doubt is not the same thing as not believing in Jesus Christ at all. Instead, it is failing to trust that he will grant us the strength and endurance to overcome the present circumstances, something every believer is guilty of because we all have our times of doubt and disbelief. Even the greatest believers in the Bible (Moses and Elijah) stumbled dramatically in how they reacted to their circumstances (**1 Kings 19; Numbers 20:11**). One could argue that those who take their lives were never saved at all. However, this may be true in some cases, but not all. 

We are not our own and belong to the awesome Creator who made us. So for any believer who takes their life, they do so exiting this world with faith intact to enter God’s kingdom but at a very poor spiritual level. But they will still be happy to an unexplainable and unimaginable degree spending eternity with their dear and precious Savior Jesus Christ. 

With all that said, let us now resume our discussion on how to handle and help brothers and sisters who struggle with past hurts and treatment. No one can ever fix a problem unless they know and acknowledge they have one. Or maybe they are aware of it and just don’t care. God doesn’t excuse either person in both circumstances. But He does forgive them and waits on them as a loving father would because that is what discipline is for (**Hebrews 12**). Our Savior is patient and caring like that. 

As we have mentioned above, the saying “get over it” is an unbiblical copout that caters to the one who said it because they often use that as an excuse not to do the right thing. Many people usually avoid doing that because it takes patience. Yes, we are all accountable to God and must make the effort of spiritual growth, progress, and production ourselves in Christ’s power. But our Lord expects all of us to bear with one another in patient love and forgiveness (**Galatians 6:2**). 

We don’t return hurt for hurt or wrong for wrong. Instead, we turn the other cheek and listen carefully to those struggling with their past and present feelings. If we mimic their behavior, we only prolong the vicious cycle that started with one person, went to another, and ended up with us (if we allow that). The best way to approach other Christians (and even unbelievers) like this is to speak gently in love and listen attentively and carefully. It is best to move on from people like them who refuse our help because they won’t desist from their way of life. The best we can do is pray for those individuals and hope they come around through the Lord’s grace. Perhaps they will have a turnaround later in life? But maybe they won’t change or will transform very little. Only the Lord knows their future (**1 Kings 8:39**). 

Gentleness is another fruit of the spirit we must employ with suffering and hurting spiritual family members. Yes, there is no excuse for all the wrong they do, but we must do our best to restore, exhort, and rebuke such people in a spirit of gentleness (**Galatians 6:10**). However, we must not allow their bad behavior to rub off unto us where they negatively influence us by getting us to compromise. That is not what it means to bear with and restore others. We must never “baby” or pamper people while failing to tell them what they need to hear at the right time with the correct motives. That will only bring trouble because we will leave out so many vital truths while adjusting ourselves to the potentially harmful desires of those who listen to us. True Christ-like love will manifest itself through the fruits of the spirit truthfully and honestly. That doesn’t mean some things should be said a certain way at certain times, for they most certainly shouldn’t. We have to exercise caution in choosing and using our words when attempting to help others. But we must still lovingly speak the truth. And we must not improperly judge or condemn said person when we have no room or place to do so because this will only bring judgment on ourselves (we must not make any assumptions but work with what the other person gives us) **Matthew 7:2**.

As to what we should say, there are many biblical possibilities. This factor depends on so many others because there are many variables. If we trust in the Lord and heed His still, small voice, then He will guide and convict us on how to approach the other person as we should. We should always take the matter to the Lord in prayer first. 

Finally, Rome wasn’t built in a day. Some people take months and even years to grow out of bad habits and attitudes due to the weight of the burden they have allowed themselves to live under for so long. We must continue to exercise patience and remember that as long as they care and attempt to change (resulting in success), that is all that matters, even if it takes slow baby steps to reach the desired goal. We could always advance more quickly, but this can depend on the person and the challenge they face. Some things take longer than others to heal, so we should always keep that in mind. Either way, Jesus is pleased with the smallest amount of faith from us. As long as our efforts continue to produce improvement, that is enough to “put a smile” on our Lord’s face. He is pleased with every bit of effort we put into spiritual growth and, in this case, recovery. And if these efforts continue, they will lead to great eternal rewards! Blessed is the man who does not give up! 

{{% scripture p="Matthew 17:20 (NIV)" %}} 

**20** He replied, “Because you have so little faith. Truly I tell you, if you have faith as small as a mustard seed, you can say to this mountain, ‘Move from here to there,’ and it will move. Nothing will be impossible for you.”                                         

{{% /scripture %}} 

{{% scripture p="Galatians 6:8-10 (ESV)" %}} 

**8** For the one who sows to his own flesh will from the flesh reap corruption, but the one who sows to the Spirit will from the Spirit reap eternal life. **9** And let us not grow weary of doing good, for in due season we will reap, if we do not give up. **10** So then, as we have opportunity, let us do good to everyone, and especially to those who are of the household of faith.                                                             

{{% /scripture %}} 

