---
title: Small Topical Studies-Part 5 
---





### **1. The Meaning of 1 Corinthians 10:31** 

the-meaning-of-1-corinthians-10-31

Spiritual growth, progress, and production should occur anytime at any place (and should not be separated from life in general). Spiritual growth is intertwined with every aspect of life because just praying, reading our Bibles, and being fed from a good teaching source is insufficient to get any believer anywhere by themselves. Without proper application of the truth, we would never grow spiritually. Therefore, growth, progress, and production can and will occur no matter where we are (whether we are at school, work, or somewhere else). 

Anywhere we go, we can minister to others, apply the truth we have learned from the Word, and learn important lessons through our application of Scripture. It doesn’t matter if we aren’t reading our Bibles at every moment of the day, of course, because anything we do can still entail spiritual growth, progress, and production. Additionally, James states that faith without works is useless. We can accomplish all three by properly thinking, talking, and behaving as our Lord would want us to. So, yes, Bible reading, prayer, and personal ministry must occur, but that all needs to carry into how we live our lives everywhere we go.

**Conclusion**- spiritual growth, progress, and production can occur at any time and place and involve just about everything we do (we must walk by the Spirit at **ALL** times). Yes, we must read God’s Word at home, but that and properly conducting ourselves elsewhere go hand in hand. Satan can tempt us at any time and place (often when we least expect it)-our flesh can act up on us at any time and place- God can test us at any time and location He desires. Everything we do in life (as [1 Corinthians 10:31](https://biblia.com/bible/nasb95/1 Cor 10.31) states) should be done for God’s glory. Anything can be used as an opportunity for spiritual learning based on how we handle those circumstances in how we think, what we say, and what we do. 

To clarify through example, just working, reading, and studying in school by themselves are not spiritual growth or production. In other words, they won’t grow anyone spiritually, just as how doing anything secular in general by itself won’t spiritually advance us. Unbelievers and lukewarm Christians do these things all the time, yet they think very little about how they are going about it. The task (**what we do and where we do it**) i**s not the issue** but how we do it- our thoughts, motives, and attitude. 

For example, a college professor or a marine does not have a better or more noble ministry than a spiritually mature person who works at McDonalds. The venue is not what matters but the spiritual fruit itself and the heart and motivations involved.  We can never grow spiritually without properly orientating ourselves to every aspect of life, regardless of what we’re doing. The goal of anything we do, whether it is work, school, or anything else, is not only for the benefit of secular learning, earning our bread and butter, or whatever else, but is most importantly, to bring glory to God. 

Everything we do should be for God’s glory, but that doesn’t mean everything counts as ministry, such as eating and drinking. In that case, we eat and drink for God’s glory by giving Him credit for providing us the meal and being thankful for it. But we aren’t serving anyone. However, we also know that ministry (spiritual fruit) also involves bringing glory to God. So the Corinthians passage is talking about glorifying God in everything (obviously), whether it produces rewardable fruit or nothing at all. So it is a mix of both rewardable and non-rewardable deeds. We don’t do everything expecting to get something in return but do so because we love God and want to see His name praised and acknowledged in all that we do. We don’t live our lives like a light switch where we do only the rewardable deeds with a good attitude and pure motives and the none-rewardable ones with a lousy mentality. Plus, we don’t know everything and how much God will reward us specifically. Some things may count in God’s eyes we may not be aware of. Who knows? 

The safest route is not to get caught up in the details but to allow the Lord to be the judge, even if many things don’t count as rewardable deeds. 



### **2. The Danger of Gossiping** 

the-danger-of-gossiping

There is nothing wrong with talking about other people when it is relevant to the discussion for the sake of example to make a point. But gossiping (which is something else) is extremely dangerous for the believer’s daily walk because it often (though not always) entails slander from impure motives and a heart that enjoys speaking badly about someone. The truth is that we can talk about another person all day long while speaking nothing but the truth about them while doing it. So if what two people say about another is true, then why not talk about them? The questions to ask are, “*Do we need to talk about this person*” or “*Do we want to talk about them to take jabs at them behind their back*?” Again, we may need to discuss the conduct of others for the sake of coming up with a solution on how to deal or cope with them. If the topic revolves around fixating on a solution for the benefit of all parties involved in whatever issue, then the purpose behind the words spoken is pure and right. But if the reason is to gratify one’s desire to hurt another while they aren’t looking, then that is sinful. Whether what a person says is true or not, impure motives don’t stem from love. 

So it is not sinful to talk about other people when they aren’t around because the issue has to do with why and how we are doing so. But false accusations become slander (**Proverbs 20:19**), and right ones spoken impurely come from the flesh. Both are sinful. A person who bears false witness against another not only lies but hurts that individual by accusing them of something that is not true (**Proverbs 6:16-19**). Ephesians 4:29 states, “ *Let no corrupting talk come out of your mouths, but only such as is good for building up, as fits the occasion, that it may give grace to those who hear*.” So helping others may require us to discuss those who are causing trouble. The intention is not to hurt or discredit the other brother or sister but to help the one harmed by assisting them to overcome the damage they have sustained from the one who sinned against them originally.  And if we confront the wrongdoer, our speech toward them should be “*seasoned with grace*” so that Christ’s love may shine forth to them through spirit-led words and actions. But if we choose to act from our flesh, we will more likely display a carnal and indifferent behavior that harbors bitterness and resentment, a mindset that may cause us to discourage and hurt the person right back. We must never return evil for evil (**1 Peter 3:9**). You cannot fight fire with fire. 

We must keep in mind that even if we speak the truth about another person from a pure heart, it is best to be as brief as possible. The reason is that the longer we focus on the problem (*why does this person keep acting this way*), the more likely we are to sin in our speech. As Ephesians 4:26 says, “*Be angry and sin not*.” We must do all things purely and righteously that seeks to bring glory to God (**1 Corinthians 10:31**). Ephesians 4:26b also tells us not to allow the sun to go down on our wrath. So we need to say what we need to say and move on. 

Gossiping (assuming impure motives) is so dangerous on so many levels because it not only hurts the other person and makes them look bad (whether what is said is true or not) but exposes the inner heart condition of those who engage in this activity. The more pleasure we take from doing it, the harder our hearts grow toward that person, and the farther we drift from God. First, if we judge, it must be a righteous assessment (**John 7:24**). And if what we say is true but spoken poorly, then we still sin. That is why it is always best to be as brief, concise, and to the point as possible when talking about other people in a non-sinful way. The more we put someone else in the spotlight, the greater the chances of us misjudging them and growing bitter. 

Gossiping is never a good idea and puts one in deep waters. How can there ever be any love and unity among the body if all the parts seek to harm each other? Failing to correct this attitude will only open up a host of other sinful possibilities the flesh will be so quick to seize and engage in. The conclusion? Failing to fix even just one habitual and constant problem in one’s life will only cause more to come flooding in. 

To end this very brief discussion, none of the above in any way suggests we have to like all people, whether they are believers or unbelievers. The Bible commands us to love all men, even our enemies (**Matthew 5:44**). But there is a difference between disliking someone and hating them entirely. Dislike is not a sin, but hate is. 



### **3. No Follower of Christ is Missing out on Anything! Coping in a Fallen and Sinful World** 

no-follower-of-christ-is-missing-out-on-anything-coping-in-a-fallen-and-sinful-world

{{% scripture p="1 Samuel 30:6 (KJV)" %}} 

**6** Now David was greatly distressed, for the people spoke of stoning him, because the soul of all the people was grieved, every man for his sons and his daughters. **But David strengthened himself in the Lord his God.**                                           

{{% /scripture %}} 

Courage founded on the strength and grace of our Lord Jesus Christ is one of the most important ways for the believer to counter the difficult life that lies ahead. The Christian life is far from easy! But it is the most joyful and rewarding path any person can take. Those who do not side with God are the ones missing out, no matter how much worldly success they may attain. All lukewarm believers who endure in their faith will still be forever happy enjoying eternal life with their Savior. But they will have lived a mostly wasted life due to their complacency toward their purpose on earth. 

It is not those who succeed in this world for themselves who partake of all the “action” but those who are actually engaging the spiritual battles around them by making the most significant difference for the Lord. Believers who love God as they should will suffer more because they are greater threats to Satan’s cause. Not only will the evil one attack such individuals more aggressively  God will test them with more frequent and higher intensity than those casually “walking the race” because their faith has grown strong enough to handle more challenging circumstances. Therefore, they will be held to higher standards because God expects the most committed followers to do more than those with less zeal. Those who give more of their lives will be expected to take greater “punishment” from the world to strengthen their relationship with God. But no believer who stays at one place for most of their life with little progress will ever be honored for making sacrifices they never made. 

It is easy for serious believers to develop a feeling that they are somehow “missing out” of all the so-called “fun” and “action” that less committed believers and unbelievers enjoy. First, no person can take any credit for what they did in this world because God gave them the ability to do it. There is nothing done in this life that God doesn’t get credit or glory for! True, He provided us with free will to choose Him, and we decide ourselves to respond. But we would never have had a free choice if God had not granted it to us. Also, we wouldn’t even exist on planet earth had our Lord never put us here.  There is nothing new under the sun, and nothing done apart from Christ will ever mean a thing in eternity. Only what is done for Him will last because only the fruit we bring forth will remain. Whether academic, athletic, or intellectual, no worldly achievements will be remembered in eternity. Only the fruit of ministry will be leftover, whether we served others through just about everything we did or not. 

Anyway, and more to the point, it is very easy to look around and see everyone else enjoying themselves and being “successful” in life. But God is the One who defines true success and rewards those who pursue His standards. The believer is not missing out on anything! They may wonder, “*everyone else has it easier and seems to be enjoying life more than me. Yet here I am, suffering and constantly engaged in spiritual battle*. *What do I have going for me? Is it worth it to continue*? *Why is life so hard for me but easier and more carefree for everyone else*” This situation results from picking up our crosses and following Jesus (**Luke 14:27**). That doesn’t mean we can’t enjoy many aspects of the physical/material world (as long as they aren’t sinful). But a total commitment to God means putting aside whatever is necessary to follow Him as He wants us to, a life that may require us to forgo our dreams, aspirations, plans, and relationships. It is highly doubtful the Lord wants us to give up all our possessions- please do not do that, dear reader! But we should be willing to give up whatever the Lord is leading us to sacrifice for Him and others (just as long as we heed the Spirit's leading properly and don't misunderstand His intentions for us). 

Increased suffering in this life (assuming it occurs because of spiritual growth) is an honor that our Lord allows us to face and one of the biggest indicators that we are doing what we are supposed to do! All those who live righteously can expect opposition and hardships (**2 Timothy 3:12**). As we grow spiritually among those indifferent or less enthusiastic to our cause, we will notice the gap between them and us beginning to grow. The world hates Jesus Christ, so it is no surprise that Satan and all those under his influence will target His most influential followers who proclaim His name in what they say and do (**John 15:18-25**). 

We live in a difficult time of the church, an era characterized by lukewarmness and indifference to the Christian life. The world of unbelievers already makes circumstances hard enough, but most in Christ’s body only add to the challenge. Physical family members are of particular interest here because they can often bring the worst out of us. In no way do we intend to bash anyone, and there have been many individuals blessed with godly, upstanding family members. But the saying from Jesus, “*A prophet is not without honor except in his own town and in his own home*” can still apply when used as a general principle. More serious believers may have unbelieving parents and siblings, while others may have less enthusiastic brothers and sisters with less commitment. The more an individual grows in the truth, the farther away they will grow from their family if they aren’t on board. It is tough (though not always) to get any “headway” with relations because they already know them and assume they have everything about the individual figured out. Therefore, they tend to take them less seriously and often don’t understand where they are going and why they are headed in the direction they are. But even though family can present a unique difficulty, that is how it is with most Christians in general. Very few want the truth, so only a small minority pursue it. 

So how does one cope with all the world's difficulties, both spiritual and physical? As we said at the beginning of this discussion, there is perhaps a no better way to do this than to encourage oneself in the Lord as David did. We must never forget that our worth, value, and identity are in Jesus Christ and Him alone (**Psalm 139:14**) and that our ultimate objective here on earth is to please our Savior with as much time and energy that He grants us. We have a mission to carry out, and the least and smallest reward in eternity will surpass the greatest earthly “accomplishment” a hundred times over. Therefore, we must always strive to think on things above (**Colossians 3:2; Philippians 4:8**) and encourage (rally ourselves) in the truth of God’s Word on which we stand. Jesus is our confidence and the very purpose of this faith of ours. Our lives are all about Him! Do we honestly think living for Him will become easier trying to do it our way? Do we believe things will get better if we compromise our spiritual progress to indulge in the world? Do we think we will get very far if we act as if this earth is our home and we will be here forever? Living for Jesus and all that such a life entails is never simple, but how much easier it becomes when we let God be our strength and confidence! 

So we may become discouraged when living for Christ causes us to lose out on this or that. But those who miss out are those who never believe. It is not our concern what the world does or what they think. We live for Jesus and strive to please Him, not people. God’s opinion is what matters, not men’s. Those giving their very best for Jesus will be misunderstood and “categorized” as people they aren’t, whether this type of behavior comes from believers or non-believers. The best thing for the committed Christian to remember is all they have in Christ, not what they don’t have. Whatever God gives or withholds, it is for our very best. 

{{% scripture p="Romans 8:28 (KJV)" %}} 

**28** And we know that all things work together for good to them that love God, to them who are the called according to his purpose.                                 

{{% /scripture %}} 

We must learn to be content with ourselves, possessions, abilities, circumstances, and lot in life. We may think we are miserable because we don’t have something WE want. But are we really sad, or is that our flesh and the devil telling us so? Just because something seems, appears, or feels a certain way does not make it the reality. If we walk by the Spirit, we must also keep in step with Him day by day, moment by moment (**Galatians 5:25**). We must heed His still, small voice by recalling all the truth He brings to our remembrance to counter such lies that we can’t be happy unless we have what WE desire. But if we encourage ourselves in the Lord who is our everything, we will bear up under these troubling thoughts and feelings so that our desires align with His. 

Do we feel inadequate or inferior to others in some way due to the sacrifices we have made for Christ? Or do we now believe our lives are less exciting and more boring because of the hardships we must endure for following Jesus?  If that is the case, we need to rethink how we are approaching our daily walk. We need to remember what the Lord has and will give us. Paul said, “*to **live is Christ** and to die is **gain***.” 

We should never feel ashamed for doing something that most people on earth **aren’t doing**- living our very best for the Lord. That is what life is all about, and those who don’t take this seriously do so to their loss and peril. For this reason, most Christians who spend eternity with God will have little to show for their time on earth.  Let’ not forget what our Lord said to Paul in 2 Corinthians 12:9-10. It is written, “*My grace is sufficient for you, for my power is made perfect in weakness*.” To this, Paul says, “*Therefore, I will boast all the more gladly about my weaknesses, so that Christ’s power may rest on me. That is why, for Christ’s sake, I delight in weaknesses, in insults, in hardships, in persecutions, in difficulties. For when I am weak, I am strong*.” So when we suffer while everyone else basks in the enjoyments of this world they pursue, we need to remember that our losses in this life are gains in eternity. Unfortunately, it is often the most serious followers of Christ who get the least amount of attention. Yet it is far better to be “under the radar” making the greatest sacrifices for the kingdom than “out in the open” receiving praise and applause from men accomplishing little. God notices all His children's work, and He sees differently than man who often bases success on fame and popularity; a reality common in the church, which often esteems the wrong people by emphasizing the lesser things.  

{{% scripture p="Matthew 19:29-30 (NIV)" %}} 

**29** And everyone who has left houses or brothers or sisters or father or mother or wife or children or fields for my sake will receive a hundred times as much and will inherit eternal life. **30** But many who are first will be last, and many who are last will be first.                                                                             

{{% /scripture %}} 

Instead of esteeming others, we should credit everything to our Lord and Master, who gave up everything to grant us the eternal life we shall one day enjoy. The more you love a person, the more you want to please them, correct? Indeed, and that is how we should conduct ourselves toward God. If we do less, it is because we love less. If we do more, it is because we love more. 



### **4. Mourning Death- We are not as Unbelievers- Don’t Commit Apostasy! Reasons for Apostasy and Why not to Give Up!**

mourning-death-we-are-not-as-unbelievers-dont-commit-apostasy-reasons-for-apostasy-and-why-not-to-give-up

{{% scripture p="1 Thessalonians 4:13-14 (NIV)" %}} 

**13** Brothers and sisters, we do not want you to be uninformed about those who sleep in death, so that you do not grieve like the rest of mankind, who have no hope. **14** For we believe that Jesus died and rose again, and so we believe that God will bring with Jesus those who have fallen asleep in him.                                                 

{{% /scripture %}} 

The passage above does not imply that it is wrong to mourn for the loss of friends and loved ones. The issue is how we grieve and why we do so. If we know the person was a believer, we are aware that they are in perfect bliss with their heavenly Father. The pain and suffering of life are over for them, and their journey and mission for Christ are now complete. We may not know as much as we may like why they passed away when they did, but the Word assures us that they are in a better place. It is more understandable when our elderly brothers and sisters go home to be with their Savior because they have lived a longer and fuller life. Their bodies broke down due to their age, and death is more likely for those more advanced in years. Also, they have used their spiritual gifts in the service God has called them to carry out. 

But what should a believer think, and how should they react when a younger family member in Christ passes away? After all, they were so young and didn’t live out their years to accomplish as much as they could have? If we knew they were genuine believers, we have confidence that they are safe and sound in the Father’s arms. It is ok to grieve and mourn, but not in a style that bespeaks unbelief as if their loved one (whether a family member or a close friend) has gone into oblivion or to eternal torment. No believer who dies physically will end up in hell. So why should we ever act like any of those things are the reality when they aren’t? 

The funeral celebrating the life of an unbeliever is most depressing and sad indeed. Not only does the person now deceased not have any hope of escaping their horrific eternal fate, but those who mourn for them have nothing to hope for, whether for that person or themselves, if they too remain in a state of unbelief. Since that is the case, we may end up grieving as the unbelievers do if the deceased individual was never saved. That is why it is so sad when unbelievers die because they have nothing going for them at all. As believers, we love them but understand that their fate is justified. They deserve to be where they are, a future we too would have shared had our Lord not loved us as much as He did by giving His One and only Son as a payment for our sins. So we should not feel sorry for anyone who dies in unbelief. They chose their destiny as the place they wanted to spend eternity forever. The free will that God gives every human being is an act of graciousness on His part that allows us to decide which path we want to take. Love is not selfish and does not seek its own. But, of course, our Lord seeks His own glory and has every right to do so. He didn’t need the angels or us, nor did He have to rescue us from the eternal nightmare that would have been the lot of all humanity had He not intervened through His atoning blood. Yet, our Savior provided us a way anyway because He loved us enough to sacrifice everything. To this we must ask, “*What more could He give*?” And because our Lord is gracious, He desires to see people choose to return the love, something God does not force anyone to do. Faith would no longer be faith if that were the case because true belief is a decision that must always stem from free will. 

So believers may grieve at a funeral, but in a way that expresses their faith in God by acknowledging His power and control. The truth contained in this last sentence is not something unbelievers do because they have no faith. No “faith” a person may claim means anything to God if the object of it is not the person and work of Jesus Christ. And many people say they are Christians who are not. Empty claims with no real substance don’t mean anything. There is perhaps nothing worse than a group of people who believe they and their deceased loved ones will spend eternity in God’s kingdom when none of them believe at all. 

The other popular beliefs of complete oblivion or an afterlife are so far off the mark and satanically inspired that it takes more faith to believe in those false teachings than it does to believe in Jesus Christ. All things had to have had a beginning, as God decreed time and created all there is in that sphere. What makes people believe that nothing awaits after death if we all came from something/someone? A little common sense will tell us we were put on this earth for a reason and that our choice therein will determine where we go after departing from this world. There is no oblivion after death but an eternity spent in either the new heaven and earth or the lake of fire. The destiny of every person depends on who they choose to follow while still alive, God or Satan. That is a choice all people must make. 

To continue our discussion, the issue for some people (believers in this case) is not always how to mourn and grieve a person’s death, but why would God allowed it to happen in the first place. There are many reasons believers commit apostasy, and the loss of a loved one is one of the leading causes, among others. The person in question may know that their brother or sister is now with the Lord. Or perhaps they lost an unbelieving friend or relative and believe God should have given them more time to come around. Whatever the case may be, the believer may become tempted to blame God and react out of anger for allowing such a loss to occur. But we must keep in mind that everything God does is for a purpose. So if we lose someone who was close to us and they were saved, we need to remember that God took them home for a reason (discipline is a strong possibility here). Yes,  it is almost always more difficult when those lost are younger people because they still had so many years left to do things. However, God knows whether they would have been productive or not and does not base His timetable on the desires and hopes of His creatures. Our Lord will not cater to us when it is not His plan or will to do so, and that is a good thing! Everything He does is the very best thing that could result! The Lord always has a reason for everything He carries out, and the purpose behind them is to create the best results for all those involved. So if a young Christian dies prematurely, we know that this was the best for them because God decreed it for their very own good. We may not and often can’t understand everything about why God does what He does because He is sovereign and mysterious,  whose ways are far greater and higher than ours (**Isaiah 55:8-9**). We just need to accept what happens by knowing that it is the best that could happen. If God did something a certain way, then there was no better alternative. 

So when we view the death of a loved one from this lens, we can lay the matter to rest, knowing it is in God’s hands. We have no right to become upset at God by accusing Him as if He has done things incorrectly (**Isaiah 45:9-12**) and wronged us by taking someone out of our lives so suddenly. Did we ever think that maybe this was for our benefit and that the trials and difficulties of this life are/were meant for our own good? Chances are, the Lord is testing our faith so that it can grow and thrive in an increasingly hostile world. Is that not love? Since we often do not know why God allows so many things to occur as they do, what makes us feel justified in running to conclusions by answering back to Him when we don’t even understand the situation? 

If Scripture tells us something, then we are meant to understand it. But we will encounter many occurrences and events in life that we may never be able to figure out this side of eternity due to their difficult nature. But that is all part of the test of life meant to grow and refine our faith. That is the whole point of God dealing with us as He does, and that is to get us to grow and walk in faith (not sight), for He has said, “*my righteous one shall live by faith*, *and if he shrinks back, my soul has no pleasure in him*.” If we believe in Christ only to desert Him in the future, then we have believed in vain (**1 Corinthians 15:2**), and our present and future lives will be more miserable than they would have been had we never believed at all (**2 Peter 2:20-22**). It makes no sense to initially believe in Christ for salvation only to disbelieve Him later on over something so much smaller and less significant than salvation itself (the death of a loved one or any other catastrophe or spiritual challenge).  

Either we believe in Christ because of who He is and what He has promised, or we believe in a life that always presents pleasant circumstances. But the Bible tells us to count the cost of discipleship, a life filled with trials and suffering (**Luke 14:28**). Is our faith even in God at all or in our hopes and expectations? This question doesn’t just apply to those who experience a sudden and unexpected death of a loved one. It applies to all those who have or are thinking about giving up on their faith in Jesus for whatever reasons. Perhaps we were led astray by some because others let us down. Have we come to believe that true biblical Christianity is a joke because so many people fail to live the Christian life properly? The result of so many people (especially those among the younger generation) departing from the faith is often because their family and those close to them have not raised them properly because they have not made the truth the priority themselves (**Proverbs 22:6**) (although this is not always the case). Those who don’t love the truth will not create zealous believers. It is no small wonder why so many young people (and even older individuals) have given up on church and then their faith later on. This phenomenon explains why so many younger Christians are unprepared to face the world when challenges to their faith arise, whether it be atheism or anything else that could become a stumbling block. So many very conservative parents of families will do everything in their power to legalistically and hypocritically shelter their children by keeping them away from things that are often of little consequence. Yet they ignore the more important internal matters such as prioritizing the truth and ensuring that their children receive and orientate themselves to it as they should.

The truth is the issue, not the more minor matters that mean far less (especially when those things entail things that aren’t even wrong). We must not forget what Jesus said when He states in Matthew 23:23-24, “*Woe to you, teachers of the law and Pharisees, you hypocrites! You give a tenth of your spices—mint, dill and cumin. But you have neglected the more important matters of the law—justice, mercy and faithfulness. You should have practiced the latter, without neglecting the former.* ***24** You blind guides! You strain out a gnat but swallow a camel.* Spiritual change has to begin inwardly before it manifests itself outwardly, not the other way around! 

We do not mean to insult other genuine believers as if to harm them by stating all the above. But spiritually weak brothers and sisters will make very poor guides despite being genuinely saved. And this doesn’t just go for more conservative families, but very liberal ones as well. This fact applies to all individuals not well-grounded in the Word period, regardless of how liberal or conservative they are. The real issue is not whether a young wavering believer thinks God is real or whether He is fair and just. The problem is whether they are truly learning the truth about who He is, understanding it, believing it, and applying it. If this process doesn’t occur, then they will never gain any spiritual ground or expect to recover from the disbelief they have fallen into. False information about God will lead to misunderstanding and knowing Him less! That is why the truth is so important! The more we know Jesus, the more we can trust Him. You can never become an actual or closer friend with someone if you never persevere to get to know them better. It is unfair for so many within and outside the church to misrepresent God by believing and teaching so many false and unbiblical things about Him. We must let the Lord and His Word speak for themselves, not allow misguided people to do the talking for us!

 There is no excuse for giving up on God at all! The problem with so many is that their faith was in people, events, circumstances, feelings, and emotions. The truth is the issue, not people. Did they fail us in whatever ways? That is on them, but that is not God’s fault. God is not for sin, nor did He create it. Instead, we human beings have brought the mess we are currently in on ourselves. We only have us to blame for that. Yet despite disturbing the natural way God intended things to be through our sinful conduct, our Savior has provided us a way out of it. He will not fail to bring our faith to completion if only we are willing to follow Him faithfully to the very end no matter what betides. No matter what challenges attack our faith, God is greater than all of them. Do we not think He can’t help us make it through safe and sound? He would never have allowed us to face any difficulty if He knew we couldn’t handle it (**1 Corinthians 10:13**) (we are all tougher than we think). Nothing we endure in this life takes God by surprise, and we should never allow any of it to shock us. He knew about everything that has and will occur before He laid the earth’s foundations.  Instead, we should expect and embrace all that God allows to come our way and see it all as it really is, a test meant to grow our faith. And if that is not the case, then we are under Satanic attack and must bear up under it as we would any other episode. 

{{% scripture p="2 Timothy 4:18 (NIV)" %}} 

**18** The Lord will rescue me from every evil attack and will bring me safely to his heavenly kingdom. To him be glory for ever and ever. Amen.     

{{% /scripture %}} 

{{% scripture p="Jeremiah 29:11 (NIV)" %}} 

**11** For I know the plans I have for you,” declares the Lord, “plans to prosper you and not to harm you, plans to give you hope and a future.                              

{{% /scripture %}} 

{{% scripture p="1 Peter 4:12-13 (NIV)" %}} 

**12** Dear friends, do not be surprised at the fiery ordeal that has come on you to test you, as though something strange were happening to you. **13** But rejoice inasmuch as you participate in the sufferings of Christ, so that you may be overjoyed when his glory is revealed.                                                                   

{{% /scripture %}} 

No two temptations and tests are the same. And, of course, we know that legitimate tests come from the Lord and temptations from the evil one because God does not tempt anyone to sin. Has someone persuaded us that God doesn’t exist or that He doesn’t care about us based on the latest teachings and arguments? The truth never changes based on argumentation, whether it is recent or the type people have been spewing out for years. The truth, like God Himself, is unchangeable and therefore consistent and trustworthy in that it remains forever faithful to those who heed it. There is only one answer in the discussion, and that answer is that Christ is the same yesterday, today, and forever (**Hebrews 13:8**). He does exist, always has, always will. And His sacrifice on the cross was for all time for everyone who would ever yearn to receive His grace. 

{{% scripture p="1 Corinthians 1:20-31 (NIV)" %}} 

**20** Where is the wise person? Where is the teacher of the law? Where is the philosopher of this age? Has not God made foolish the wisdom of the world? **21** For since in the wisdom of God the world through its wisdom did not know him, God was pleased through the foolishness of what was preached to save those who believe. **22** Jews demand signs and Greeks look for wisdom, **23** but we preach Christ crucified: a stumbling block to Jews and foolishness to Gentiles, **24** but to those whom God has called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God and the wisdom of God. **25** For the foolishness of God is wiser than human wisdom, and the weakness of God is stronger than human strength. **26** Brothers and sisters, think of what you were when you were called. Not many of you were wise by human standards; not many were influential; not many were of noble birth. **27** But God chose the foolish things of the world to shame the wise; God chose the weak things of the world to shame the strong. **28** God chose the lowly things of this world and the despised things—and the things that are not—to nullify the things that are, **29** so that no one may boast before him. **30** It is because of him that you are in Christ Jesus, who has become for us wisdom from God—that is, our righteousness, holiness and redemption. **31** Therefore, as it is written: “Let the one who boasts boast in the Lord.”                          

{{% /scripture %}} 

{{% scripture p="James 1:13-17 (NIV)" %}} 

**13** When tempted, no one should say, “God is tempting me.” For God cannot be tempted by evil, nor does he tempt anyone; **14** but each person is tempted when they are dragged away by their own evil desire and enticed. **15** Then, after desire has conceived, it gives birth to sin; and sin, when it is full-grown, gives birth to death. **16** Don’t be deceived, my dear brothers and sisters. **17** Every good and perfect gift is from above, coming down from the Father of the heavenly lights, who does not change like shifting shadows.                                                      

{{% /scripture %}} 

It is no surprise and a good thing that so many Christians are abandoning the majority of churches we have today because most of them are lukewarm (**Revelation 3:14-22**). We should never support or waste our time in places and with others who aren’t helping our spiritual advance because it is almost always the case that we are affected by those we closely associate with. We need to love all our brothers and sisters but may have to leave some of them behind for our spiritual benefit. But just because we can’t find a physical church to attend does not mean there is no other alternative. The truth is out there, and a small minority of teachers and ministries are dispensing it properly. So leaving the physical church is not a bad thing if it wasn’t doing us any good. The greatest advice to those who are fed up with Christianity is, “*Don’t give up! Keep searching! Don’t leave one bad extreme only to take hold of another*!” Just because most churches are in an abysmal state does not mean there aren’t other believers who are doing what they should be doing. The issue is not how everyone else lives their lives and what they believe and why they do. The real issue is, “*What does the Bible REALLY say and how does the Lord want ME to conduct my life*!” It is not about what people want for us but what the Lord would have us do that is the issue. 

Just because people in most churches and groups have failed through misinterpretation and misapplication of the Word does not mean God advocates their behavior- He doesn’t. The problem lies with the way people have chosen to behave toward God, NOT how He decides to act toward us. Sin and disobedience are the issue, especially among poorly grounded believers who refuse to change their spiritual approach. And not only that, but the world of unbelievers is under the control of Satan so that they are only his instruments to carry out his dark deeds. Does it surprise us that so many lies (outside the church) and false teachings (within it) seek to lead the believer astray? There should be none. It is all to be expected. If we do things God’s way instead of man’s, we will succeed. Assuming we genuinely desire the truth, the Lord will lead us to individuals teaching it correctly. If we don’t get the answers, we never truly wanted them. All who seek find because God will never withhold answers to those who genuinely wish to comprehend them. The solution to the problem of wavering faith is continuous faith itself in the person and work of Jesus Christ. He will give us all we need and want and will never fail us or let us down. If we believe He has, then we are only letting ourselves down by failing to trust in Him. The mistakes always come from us people, not our heavenly Father, who is perfect in everything He does. 

{{% scripture p="1 Peter 4:15-19" %}} 

**15** If you suffer, it should not be as a murderer or thief or any other kind of criminal, or even as a meddler. **16** However, if you suffer as a Christian, do not be ashamed, but praise God that you bear that name. **17** For it is time for judgment to begin with God’s household; and if it begins with us, what will the outcome be for those who do not obey the gospel of God? **18** And, “If it is hard for the righteous to be saved, what will become of the ungodly and the sinner?” **19** So then, those who suffer according to God’s will **should commit themselves to their faithful Creator and continue to do good.**                                         

{{% /scripture %}} 



### **5. Nothing will Stop God’s Plan- Examples of Satanic Attack from Scripture- Types of Antichrist** 

nothing-will-stop-gods-plan-examples-of-satanic-attack-from-scripture-types-of-antichrist

As every believer knows, Satan has opposed God’s plan since the beginning of creation. We have already discussed that humans are a replacement for Lucifer and all his followers because they forfeited their place in God’s presence. The Lord created people to demonstrate His perfect and righteous character to all the doubters (Satan and the other fallen angels). So God created human beings in His own image and likeness (the ability to exercise authority and respond to it through free will) who could and would be willing to respond to Him through faith. The Lord made this possible by giving Himself up on the cross to pay for every person’s past, present, and future sins. The devil believed that God had no way of reconciling the human race to Himself in a way that maintained His perfect character. However, Satan was wrong and taken by surprise when our Lord made all this possible by giving Himself up on the cross; a feat carried out perfectly from His birth until His death. Therefore, Christ has won the victory! Satan is technically already defeated even though the rest of history still has to run its course. The book of Revelation tells us how this will all play out to the very last days right before eternity commences. 

With the above said, let’s now briefly survey some of the most prominent examples of Satanic attack on God’s plan. The below is not meant to be a comprehensive list. There are other examples in the Bible not mentioned here, but we will focus on the more prominent ones to give the reader a good idea of the pattern seen in Scripture. 

**Adam and Eve-** 

The first example we have from Scripture comes from the temptation and fall of Adam and Eve. 

{{% scripture p="Genesis 3:1-6 (NIV)" %}} 

Now the serpent was more crafty than any of the wild animals the Lord God had made. He said to the woman, “Did God really say, ‘You must not eat from any tree in the garden’?” **2** The woman said to the serpent, “We may eat fruit from the trees in the garden, **3** but God did say, ‘You must not eat fruit from the tree that is in the middle of the garden, and you must not touch it, or you will die.’” **4** “You will not certainly die,” the serpent said to the woman. **5** “For God knows that when you eat from it your eyes will be opened, and you will be like God, knowing good and evil.” **6** When the woman saw that the fruit of the tree was good for food and pleasing to the eye, and also desirable for gaining wisdom, she took some and ate it. She also gave some to her husband, who was with her, and he ate it.                       

{{% /scripture %}} 

From what we have written above, we know that God created man to replace Satan and all his followers. So it is no surprise that the evil one (aware of it as he was) took the opportunity to launch his first attack on this “replacement plan.” He knew that these two individuals and some of their offspring after them would become his replacements. Satan hates God, so he will always abhor His followers for that very reason. Anyone who sides with his arch-enemy must be dealt with in whatever manner and method at his disposal. But our Lord would only allow Satan so much leeway to do what he wanted because allowing the devil too much power and freedom would mean the ultimate destruction of humanity and the free will they were given. God could not allow the very purpose of His creation of man to be unfairly thwarted in this manner, so Satan can only do that which the Lord permits Him to accomplish. Unless there is divine permission, no fallen angel may spiritually or physically harm any believer. 

Adam and Eve began the replacement process. So to keep people from choosing for God, Satan thought it best to attack the first people whose seed would continue throughout history. He was partially successful in his endeavor here, but not entirely. Sin entered the world so that near perfection was no longer a reality. So what would God do now that the devil had aided in humanity's destruction? No one could choose for God if no way of escape and atonement for sins were ever provided (**Romans 6:23**). Men were now destined for physical and spiritual (eternal) death. Satan thought he had outwitted God by cornering him, but he failed to remember that our Lord foreknew everything in eternity past so that He would not have done something without knowing what He was doing. Why would He create man if He knew He could not save them after their rebellion? The first humans did sin, but God promised them that He would provide a way out of the mess created by this first transgression that carries into the rest of history. The solution would come through the death, burial, and resurrection of God’s Son, Jesus Christ. That is why God gave Adam and Eve the coats of skin for them to wear (**Genesis 3:21**), clothing they accepted in faith demonstrating their belief and acceptance in Christ's future atoning work. At that very point, the first humans got saved by receiving the salvation promised to them, even if they didn’t fully understand the details or what it would entail. From their standpoint, Adam and Eve didn’t know how all this would happen. They believed God that it would occur, resulting in their salvation. Instead of trying to continue working their way to their Creator by holding onto the fig leaf clothes they had worked to create, they relinquished them to accept God’s grace that could not be earned or worked for in any way. Salvation and sanctification are always God’s work, not ours! Since the cross, all people now had a way to access God and spend eternity with Him from there on out. Satan’s first attack, though partially successful, was, in all reality, a failure. 

**The Nephilim-** 

The second major attack from Satan on the human race occurred during the demonic rebellion involving angelic reproduction with human women resulting in the Nephilim. We see this event mentioned in Genesis chapter six when it says what it does below. Only some of the fallen angels were involved (they were either chosen or volunteered). 

{{% scripture p="Genesis 6:1-8 (NIV)" %}} 

When human beings began to increase in number on the earth and daughters were born to them, **2** the sons of God saw that the daughters of humans were beautiful, and they married any of them they chose. **3** Then the Lord said, “My Spirit will not contend with humans forever, for they are mortal; their days will be a hundred and twenty years.” **4** The Nephilim were on the earth in those days—and also afterward—when the sons of God went to the daughters of humans and had children by them. They were the heroes of old, men of renown. **5** The Lord saw how great the wickedness of the human race had become on the earth, and that every inclination of the thoughts of the human heart was only evil all the time. **6** The Lord regretted that he had made human beings on the earth, and his heart was deeply troubled. **7** So the Lord said, “I will wipe from the face of the earth the human race I have created—and with them the animals, the birds and the creatures that move along the ground—for I regret that I have made them.” **8** But Noah found favor in the eyes of the Lord.                                            

{{% /scripture %}} 

And yes, these “sons of God” were, in fact, angels who came to earth and procreated with human women to form the demonic offspring that would result. In other parts of the Bible, *beney ha-'elohiym* refers to angels and not man (**Psalm 29:1; 103;20; 148:2; 89:6; Job 1:6; 2:1; 38:7**). Also, every other passage that mentions these events refers to fallen angels as the culprits (see references below). Those involved in this heinous act have since been imprisoned in the abyss to await their final judgment (**1 Peter 3:19-20; 2 Peter 4:10; Jude 1:5-7**). 

This second attack on God’s plan from Satan occurred the way it did because the future promised Messiah who would die on the cross to pay for the sins of humanity would require pure seed to come about. In other words, Jesus would be born in the line of David from pure human origin. Satan failed the first time, now he tries a second approach. The Messiah cannot be born without a pure bloodline to bring it about, so why not infiltrate the human race by corrupting all human seed? As our passage describes, people were wicked in those days, so it is no surprise why so many went along with this idea to reproduce with spiritual beings. After all, their offspring were highly talented, so who wouldn’t want children like that (says the mind of the unbeliever)? So corrupt had the minds of almost all human beings become at that time that nothing seemed wrong or sinful. Therefore, they quickly succumbed to persuasion, and the rest is history. 

Once again, however, God had long ago anticipated Satan’s next move so that He already had a solution in mind. The seed of the Messiah would be preserved through Noah and his family, whom the Lord would spare on the ark. Noah, along with his wife and three sons, Shem, Ham, and Japheth (and their wives), were righteous and thus fit to be preserved through the great deluge. The flood would destroy all the demonic offspring (the Nephilim) so that no more people would succumb to this “illegal” activity on the part of all the fallen angels thus involved. God imprisoned those who partook of these crimes while their half- human offspring he physically wiped out in the flood. But Noah and his family were saved by their faith (represented by the ark). Noah trusted God that He would provide a way out of the current mess, just as Adam and Eve did. Now, for the second time, Satan’s goal of “outsmarting” the Almighty failed. 

{{% scripture p="Genesis 6:11-20 (NIV)" %}} 

**11** Now the earth was corrupt in God’s sight and was full of violence. **12** God saw how corrupt the earth had become, for all the people on earth had corrupted their ways. **13** So God said to Noah, “I am going to put an end to all people, for the earth is filled with violence because of them. I am surely going to destroy both them and the earth. **14** So make yourself an ark of cypress wood; make rooms in it and coat it with pitch inside and out. **15** This is how you are to build it: The ark is to be three hundred cubits long, fifty cubits wide and thirty cubits high. **16** Make a roof for it, leaving below the roof an opening one cubit high all around. Put a door in the side of the ark and make lower, middle and upper decks. **17** I am going to bring floodwaters on the earth to destroy all life under the heavens, every creature that has the breath of life in it. Everything on earth will perish. **18** But I will establish my covenant with you, and you will enter the ark—you and your sons and your wife and your sons’ wives with you. **19** You are to bring into the ark two of all living creatures, male and female, to keep them alive with you. **20** Two of every kind of bird, of every kind of animal and of every kind of creature that moves along the ground will come to you to be kept alive.                                                                   

{{% /scripture %}} 

**The Tower of Babel** 

{{% scripture p="Genesis 11:1-9 (NIV)" %}} 

Now the whole world had one language and a common speech. **2** As people moved eastward, they found a plain in Shinar and settled there. **3** They said to each other, “Come, let’s make bricks and bake them thoroughly.” They used brick instead of stone, and tar for mortar. **4** Then they said, “Come, let us build ourselves a city, with a tower that reaches to the heavens, so that we may make a name for ourselves; otherwise we will be scattered over the face of the whole earth.” **5** But the Lord came down to see the city and the tower the people were building. **6** The Lord said, “If as one people speaking the same language they have begun to do this, then nothing they plan to do will be impossible for them. **7** Come, let us go down and confuse their language so they will not understand each other.” **8** So the Lord scattered them from there over all the earth, and they stopped building the city. **9** That is why it was called Babel—because there the Lord confused the language of the whole world. From there the Lord scattered them over the face of the whole earth.                                                                  

{{% /scripture %}} 

Elsewhere on this ministry site, we have discussed the tower of Babel and the danger of a world without nationalism. Nationalism (different nations with different languages and cultures) must exist if the human race continues and survives as it does now. Of course, God will never allow anything outside of His will to occur, though Satan has and will come close to achieving the goal of eliminating all differences between the nations. The devil worked through Nimrod to carry out his purpose of bringing all people together to coexist as one culture, religion, and identity. Every person born into a society like this one would grow up under such a negative influence that practically nobody from that point on would be inclined to choose for God because they would all have one false religion. When all people's only purpose and goal is to serve the evil one, that leaves out God’s desire (will) for all to receive Him in faith.  Salvation would almost never occur  if everybody served Satan, thus eliminating most or almost all righteous persons after that. How could the Messiah be born if no spiritually pure ancestors ever existed? 

Thankfully, God foreknew and eliminated this threat by confusing the languages so that people had no choice but to separate and form different nations and cultures. After this point, the human race was no longer as easy to attack and was far less susceptible to self-destruction. Satan wanted to force people to choose his side by setting up a society that would dominate and decide how they lived. But once again, he failed. However, he will attempt this again during the tribulation, a subject we will discuss later below. 

**Israel and the church- (Both are part of the Church)** 

We will be brief with this section simply because it speaks for itself. The main reason is that there are so many examples of anti-Jewish behavior throughout history that time and space do not permit us to discuss them here, nor is it necessary for us to do so. Antisemitism has existed as long as the nation of Israel has and will continue only until after the Gog and Magog rebellion (see below for our brief discussion on that). The Lord used many nations to punish and discipline the Jewish people (we see that from both the old and new testaments). But there were many instances where Israel was the innocent victims targeted because they were God’s special people in whom the prophecies and their fulfillment would occur. Before the cross, Satan was extremely aggressive in attempting to wipe out the Jews so that the Messiah could never come and complete the work of redemption for which He was sent. After Christ’s first advent, the evil one has concentrated on destroying all those part of the church (persecution, war, resistance, false teaching etc.), both Jews and Gentiles. He does this so that the biblical prophecies portending to the end times would end with the result of faith being quenched and snuffed out. But we know from Revelation that he and his followers will meet their ultimate doom ending in the lake of fire. In the end, God will triumph, and we (His followers) will share in that victory. 

**The Tribulation** 

{{% scripture p="Matthew 24:21 (ESV)" %}} 

**21** For then there will be great tribulation, such as has not been from the beginning of the world until now, no, and never will be.                                      

{{% /scripture %}} 

{{% scripture p="Jeremiah 30:7 (ESV)" %}} 

**7** Alas! That day is so great there is none like it; it is a time of distress for Jacob; yet he shall be saved out of it.                                                  

{{% /scripture %}} 

The tribulation is the only prophecy in the Bible that awaits its fulfillment. After that comes the thousand-year reign of Christ, also known as the Millennium. The tribulation will be Satan’s most aggressive attempt yet to thwart God’s plan to discredit Him and wipe out His followers. We must remember that the devil wants to prove God as a false, unjust being who isn’t who He says He is. But how wrong Satan is! He knows his destruction is coming yet continues to try to do as much damage as he can to get a chunk out of God. But the evil one can never take any credit for the eternal loss of any unbeliever because he never forced any of them to go there. After all, they chose that destiny themselves. By himself, the devil has no power to send any person anywhere. All he can do is make choosing for Christ more difficult by tempting every individual and throwing obstacles in their way. Free will would no longer be free if any outside force decided every man’s fate. All people must choose for themselves (**Joshua 24:14-15**). 

Satan’s goal during the tribulation will be to wipe all faith from the earth by eliminating every believer (both Jew and Gentile) part of Christ’s church (**Luke 18:8**). As with the tower of Babel, his aim will be to cause all people on earth to worship him. All those who resist this order (believers) will suffer persecution, death, imprisonment, and loss of property and possessions. Once again, Satan will come close to achieving his goal because Matthew 24:21 states, “*And if those days had not been cut short, no human being would be saved. But for the sake of the elect those days will be cut short*.” But he will only come close because the Lord allowed Him to. The more pride, the harder and more dramatic the fall. Our Lord will let the devil have success to a limited extent so that He may manifest and further magnify His glory before all in a magnificent display of His power and justice. As we already know, the tribulation’s primary purpose is to punish the unbelieving world while disciplining the church. Satan will have limited success with Christ’s body when one-third of believers fall away from the faith to serve the beast. But the other two-thirds of the church alive during those terrible days will endure in their faith and spend eternity with Jesus Christ. Finally, many will come to God during the tribulation due to the evangelization of the 144,000 and the two witnesses (most likely Moses and Elijah). Plus, many more will call upon the name of the Lord at and after Christ’s return when they look on Him whom they have pierced (**Revelation 1:7**). The Millennium will also be a time of great evangelization when many will receive the good news of the gospel (that occurs after the tribulation). 

In the end, Satan’s plot during the difficult years of the tribulation will fail, and God will triumph when He returns to throttle His enemies at the battle of Armageddon. No matter how all the details work themselves out, God will receive all the glory. Satan will not eliminate faith from the earth, nor will he get his way in having all people bow down to his son, the antichrist. In the end, every knee shall bow and tongue confess that Jesus Christ is Lord. 

{{% scripture p="Luke 18:7-8 (ESV)" %}} 

**7** And will not God give justice to his elect, who cry to him day and night? Will he delay long over them? **8** I tell you, he will give justice to them speedily. Nevertheless, when the Son of Man comes, **will he find faith on earth**?”                               

{{% /scripture %}} 

**The Gog and Magog Rebellion** 

{{% scripture p="Revelation 20:1-10 (NIV)" %}} 

And I saw an angel coming down out of heaven, having the key to the Abyss and holding in his hand a great chain. **2** He seized the dragon, that ancient serpent, who is the devil, or Satan, and bound him for a thousand years. **3** He threw him into the Abyss, and locked and sealed it over him, to keep him from deceiving the nations anymore until the thousand years were ended. After that, he must be set free for a short time. **4** I saw thrones on which were seated those who had been given authority to judge. And I saw the souls of those who had been beheaded because of their testimony about Jesus and because of the word of God. They had not worshiped the beast or its image and had not received its mark on their foreheads or their hands. They came to life and reigned with Christ a thousand years. **5** (The rest of the dead did not come to life until the thousand years were ended.) This is the first resurrection. **6** Blessed and holy are those who share in the first resurrection. The second death has no power over them, but they will be priests of God and of Christ and will reign with him for a thousand years. **7** When the thousand years are over, Satan will be released from his prison **8** and will go out to deceive the nations in the four corners of the earth—Gog and Magog—and to gather them for battle. In number they are like the sand on the seashore. **9** They marched across the breadth of the earth and surrounded the camp of God’s people, the city he loves. But fire came down from heaven and devoured them. **10** And the devil, who deceived them, was thrown into the lake of burning sulfur, where the beast and the false prophet had been thrown. They will be tormented day and night for ever and ever.                                                            

{{% /scripture %}} 

The Gog and Magog rebellion is Satan's last and final chance to oppose God. Once the tribulation has run its course, the devil and all his followers will be imprisoned in the abyss for the entire thousand years of the Millennium. After this period is over, the Lord will give him one final chance to confirm his wicked opposition to Him (God) and increase the glory brought to Himself. One of the reasons the Lord will allow this is to show the hard-hearted hate that lives within so many people who have turned a deaf ear to their Creator. In other words, this final rebellion will demonstrate the sinful wickedness of humankind despite living in a near paradise during those final years of goodness. The world’s population could not have it any better than what they will possess during Christ’s rule on earth, making their condemnation for rebelling against Him all the more clear and justified. God will demonstrate to the fallen angels and all of humanity that even exceptional graciousness and circumstances will not override human free will, even though the people during that time may live in a near-perfect world with near-perfect living conditions. The Lord will, once again, confirm His steadfast love for all humanity by allowing people (instead of forcing them) to choose where they want to go in life. Once again, God will “advertise” the great God He is, something He has been doing for all of human history. This final rebellion from Satan will be (in some sense) an unfortunate (only in the sense that people will rebel against God resulting in their condemnation) closing ceremony that will once again confirm that there is no other God in the universe like Jesus Christ. There are no other “gods” period. 

The sad reality is that most of the world’s population alive during that time will be unbelievers. This sad and pathetic state is even more disheartening, especially considering that God’s presence will be more noticeable and manifested than ever before in human history; this will be a time of exceptional peace, joy, and prosperity. Jesus will reign on earth so that His presence and lordship will be clearer to all than ever before. Therefore, all those who reject Him won’t be able to say they never knew about Him (that has never been the case for anyone at all), for that they did yet still refused to accept His gracious offer of eternal life. The issue with all unbelievers is not whether they have enough convincing (in their own minds according to their own standards) proof, but whether they want Jesus to be their God and king. There is no such thing as anyone who rejected Christ because they lacked sufficient evidence for His existence. Instead, it all comes down to those individuals desiring what they already knew existed. No one who ever dies in unbelief ever loved God. Our Lord made it very clear when He said, “*Whoever is not with me is against me, and whoever does not gather with me scatters”* (**Matthew 12:30; Luke 11:23**). Quoting from Psalms, John 15:25 says, “*They hated me without reason*.” The Millennium will confirm this attitude like no time ever before! Not only that but so much that has hindered humanity throughout the years before Christ’s reign (false religion/teaching etc.) will not be tolerated during our Lord’s rule on earth (**Ezekiel 11:17-19; Zechariah 13:2-6**). Therefore, there will be even fewer impediments to true faith during this time than at any period in the past. 

Additionally, there will be more quality pastors and teachers to spread and teach the truth than ever before (**Jeremiah 3:15**). God’s rule will make coming to Him easier than at any other time in history, a kind act of grace that will allow the last people who live in more than optimal conditions to see and accept the truth. Yet the stubborn hard-hearted condition of the unbelieving human heart will still prevail for most people during that period. 

{{% scripture p="Habakuk 2:14 (NIV)" %}} 

**14** For the earth (during the Millennium) will be filled with the knowledge of the glory of the Lord as the waters cover the sea.                                                   

{{% /scripture %}} 

{{% scripture p="Jeremiah 31:33-34 (NIV)" %}} 

**33** “This is the covenant I will make with the people of Israel after that time,” declares the Lord. “I will put my law in their minds and write it on their hearts. I will be their God, and they will be my people. **34** No longer will they teach their neighbor, or say to one another, ‘Know the Lord,’ because they will all know me, from the least of them to the greatest,” declares the Lord. “For I will forgive their wickedness and will remember their sins no more.”                                         

{{% /scripture %}} 

To sum up, the Gog and Magog rebellion will be a desperate, last-ditch effort from Satan to thwart God’s plan. But Our Lord will vanquish it quickly and with ease. 

**Types of Antichrist** 

In addition to giving us the biggest examples of Satanic attacks on the plan of God, Scripture also gives us a few biblical parallels to the antichrist spoken of in Revelation, and it is no accident the Bible does this either. God wants us to benefit from the examples of the past because we believers can learn from years gone by to help us prepare for the future that is yet to come. The great believers of old faced their opposition with steadfast faith and courage, knowing that the Lord would see them through their trials. Of course, they were never perfect in their application, but they fared better than anyway else before, during, and after them. Thus, they stand as the ultimate examples and role models. With that, let’s briefly examine and survey the most prominent cases of this type of situation where an extremely hardened unbeliever was symbolic of the eschatological Antichrist. 

**Nimrod** 

{{% scripture p="Genesis 10:8-13 (NIV)" %}} 

**8** Cush was the father of Nimrod, who became a mighty warrior on the earth. **9** He was a mighty hunter before the Lord; that is why it is said, “Like Nimrod, a mighty hunter before the Lord.” **10** The first centers of his kingdom were Babylon, Uruk, Akkad and Kalneh, in Shinar. **11** From that land he went to Assyria, where he built Nineveh, Rehoboth Ir, Calah **12** and Resen, which is between Nineveh and Calah—which is the great city.                                        

{{% /scripture %}} 

Nimrod represents the eschatological Antichrist in that he attempted to bring all people together as one nation with one goal and religion. As we have mentioned, this would make faith all but impossible since a society like that would suppress the worship of the true God. Anyone born into such an atmosphere would be so heavily brainwashed that they would more than likely fail to try and attempt to see the truth through all the lies. None of this means that free will could no longer exist or that people couldn’t believe in God because they most certainly could have. Plus, the Bible doesn’t tell us whether all people on earth joined this mass movement voluntarily. There is a good chance that some didn’t. But most people would have chosen to put themselves under the satanic influence of this “new order.” Essentially, Nimrod and those who went on board with his ideas rebelled against God. They did not want to follow Him or submit to His ways but chose to go their own direction. This terrible trend was something that God would not tolerate, which explains why He confused the languages. If most or everyone came together, Satan would have had an easier time influencing the human race and swaying them all over to his cause. 

Verse nine states that Nimrod was a mighty warrior on earth. The Hebrew word for mighty is *gibbor* גבור a meaning that refers not only to physical strength but also to other areas of power such as political and moral influence. He was well-known and highly respected by most of the earth’s inhabitants during that period. The phrase “*He was a mighty hunter before the Lord*” refers to his crafty and clever abilities to “catch” men’s hearts and persuade them to follow his cause. He won people over by his clever (be it ever so evil) diplomacy to get them to support his aspirations and goals. After all, he could not have accomplished anything without help. In Matthew 4:19, Jesus told some of His disciples, “*Follow me and I will make you fishers of men*.” That was and is a good thing, but not so in Nimrod’s case. He would catch men with evil, anti-God intentions, goals, and purposes. Satan worked through Him to oppose the authority and plan of God, much like he will do through his son, the Antichrist, during the tribulation. The beast’s agenda will be to eliminate nationalism to ripen the human race for satanic destruction. All those who oppose this (believers) must be eliminated. 

Nimrod’s analogous plan failed just as the antichrist’s will during his time on earth. He and the beast want/wanted nothing to do with God and would rather give their allegiance to their father the devil. 

**Pharaoh**

Exodus chapters 2-14 tell us of the Pharaoh’s behavior toward the Israelites when he refused to let them go. He is very analogous to the “lawless one” of the tribulation because he opposed and persecuted God’s people. The beast will do the same in a roughly similar manner when he imprisons, tortures, and kills believers for standing steadfast in their faith. 

God never forced this Egyptian ruler to reject Him because the Pharaoh had already done that himself. Since that was the case (he had no intention of changing his mind), God hardened his heart to an extraordinary degree by allowing Pharaoh the ability to close himself off like few (if any) humans had done up to that point. Our Lord did this to bring glory to Himself, just as how the rebellion of the beast and all unbelievers during the tribulation will accomplish this same purpose-demonstrating God’s righteous character toward those who disobey Him. Please see that topic in the link below by Robert D. Luginbill for more information on that particular subject. This same phenomena we saw with Pharaoh will also occur during the tribulation when the Holy Spirit’s restraint (referring to our Lord only permitting humanity to do so much evil) will be withdrawn so that people may act as evil and wicked as they possibly could without God’s hand keeping them in check. 

Not only was Pharaoh bent on opposing God (like the beast will be), but he was so adamant about afflicting God’s people unfairly. There is a reason the Bible describes the beast as “the man of lawlessness.” The Pharaoh demonstrated extreme pride and arrogance by opposing and exalting himself above the lordship of God by acting as if he was “God” himself! 

{{% scripture p="2 Thessalonians 2:3-4 (NKJV)" %}} 

**3** Let no one deceive you by any means; for *that Day will not come* unless the falling away comes first, and the man of sin is revealed, the son of perdition, **4 who opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God or that is worshiped, so that he sits as God in the temple of God, showing himself that he is God.**                                 

{{% /scripture %}} 

Worse yet, Pharaoh never repented of his ways despite all the miraculous plagues that God sent to ravage his kingdom. These plagues are analogous to those that will occur during the tribulation (the trumpet, bowl, and thunder judgments). The beast will not repent of his evil ways despite all the terror that God will unleash during that time. 

**The King of Assyria** 

Scripture mentions the wicked king of Assyria in Isaiah chapters 7-39 and elsewhere as God’s means to chasten His sinning people in the northern and southern kingdoms, but only for that purpose. The way this king carried out his task makes him stand out as very similar to the beast of Revelation. He demonstrated extreme pride and arrogance against God and those around him and refused to be moved or persuaded to behave otherwise. The fate of him and his army is practically a pre-enactment of what will happen to the antichrist and his hordes when they invade Jerusalem at the battle of Armageddon. All the future inhabitants of the holy city during the time of Jacob’s trouble will be hemmed inside by the beast’s armies with nowhere else to turn. They will come close to losing all hope and giving up. But just as it appears that they will be overcome, the Lord will return and destroy all of those who oppose Him and His followers. This situation was very similar with Hezekiah and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem when they desperately prayed to God for help and deliverance as they waited cornered within Jerusalem’s walls. It seemed to the people as if all hope was lost due to the enormous forces of Sennacherib’s armies. Finally, however, the Lord intervened and massacred all those who threatened to destroy His people. Sennacherib would go back to his own land where he would later die at the hand of his own sons in Nineveh. The passage below describes this destruction of his forces and how it came about. 

{{% scripture p="2 Kings 19:32-37 (NKJV)" %}} 

**32** “Therefore thus says the Lord concerning the king of Assyria: ‘He shall not come into this city, Nor shoot an arrow there, Nor come before it with shield, Nor build a siege mound against it. **33** By the way that he came, By the same shall he return; And he shall not come into this city,’ Says the Lord. **34** ‘For I will defend this city, to save it For My own sake and for My servant David’s sake.’  **35** And it came to pass on a certain night that the angel of the Lord went out, and killed in the camp of the Assyrians one hundred and eighty-five thousand; and when *people* arose early in the morning, there were the corpses—all dead. **36** So Sennacherib king of Assyria departed and went away, returned *home,* and remained at Nineveh. **37** Now it came to pass, as he was worshiping in the temple of Nisroch his god, that his sons Adrammelech and Sharezer struck him down with the sword; and they escaped into the land of Ararat. Then Esarhaddon his son reigned in his place.   

{{% /scripture %}} 

Most notable of Sennacherib was the blasphemy he spoke against God, something the lawless one will do the extreme. Therefore, we will contrast the two passages below. 

{{% scripture p="2 Chronicles 32:16-19 (NASB)" %}} 

**16** His (Sennacherib’s servants) servants spoke further against the Lord God and against His servant Hezekiah. **17** He also wrote letters to insult the Lord God of Israel, and to speak against Him, saying, “As the gods of the nations of the lands have not saved their people from my hand, so the God of Hezekiah will not save His people from my hand.” **18** They called *this* out with a loud voice in the language of Judah to the people of Jerusalem who were on the wall, to frighten and terrify them, so that they might take the city. **19** They spoke of the God of Jerusalem as *they did* against the gods of the peoples of the earth, the work of human hands.                               

{{% /scripture %}} 

{{% scripture p="Revelation 13:4-6 (NKJV)" %}} 

**4** So they worshiped the dragon who gave authority to the beast; and they worshiped the beast, saying, “Who *is* like the beast? Who is able to make war with him?” **5** And he was given a mouth speaking great things and blasphemies, and he was given authority to continue for forty-two months. **6** Then he opened his mouth in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme His name, His tabernacle, and those who dwell in heaven.                                                              

{{% /scripture %}} 

As a final comment, Isaiah chapter nineteen expresses a near and far-term prophecy. That is to say, the giving of Egypt “into the hands of a cruel master” spoken of in verse four refers not only to the Assyrian domination of Egypt during biblical times, but also the beast’s conquest and success against the southern alliance (which Egypt will be part of) during the tribulation. Thus, the military campaigns of Sennacherib and the Assyrians are a prototype of the Antichrist and his forces overcoming the last major threat to his regime-the southern alliance. 

**Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon** 

The Babylon of antiquity represents the future, evil mystery Babylon (most likely the United States) spoken of in Revelation (**Revelation 14:8** as a subtle reference). Isaiah 14:4-23 seems to compare this king to Satan, the origin of the lawless one. The Babylon of the future will be the beast’s headquarters and base of operation from which he launches his plans elsewhere. King Nebuchadnezzar was the king of the old Babylonian empire and exalted himself above God by erecting a statue of himself for everyone to bow to and worship. He was a self-proclaimer who forced everyone to worship himself instead of the One true God. And (much like the beast will do during the tribulation), he would kill anyone who would not worship his image. From Daniel and Matthew, we know it as the “abomination of spiritual desolation” which he will compel all people to worship (**Daniel 9:7; Matthew 24:15-16**). The past king of Babylon had his own version of this and a similar (though less extreme) goal in mind; to bring glory and honor to himself and not God. 

**Antiochus Epiphanes** 

Antiochus Epiphanes was the king and ruler of the Seleucid empire, and another prototype of the eschatological Antichrist. **Daniel 8:23-26; 11:21-36** prophecies about him as a near distant “thorn in the flesh” of Israel who will oppose God and do as he wishes. But this passage also has a dual application in that it is also a far distant prophecy that refers to the ultimate agitator of Israel, the Antichrist.

To continue,  this wicked Seleucid ruler attempted to end and take over the temple sacrifices and rituals to put a stop to the worship of the One true God, much like the beast will do at the Tribulation’s mid-point when he puts an end to the daily sacrifices and desecrates the temple. Antiochus wanted to Hellenize the Jews by turning them away from God and onto Himself, just as how the beast will do when he poses as Christ come back in the flesh. 

Additionally, the terrible changes made by Antiochus resulted in mass apostasy and martyrdom, the same type of results we will see during the tribulation from all the deception that will occur during that period. Whoever did not partake of Antiochus’s “reforms” was to be executed. The beast will do the same to those who refuse to worship him and take his mark. Time and space do not permit us to examine the other similarities (there are many others) between these individuals because that would require a great deal of further explanation. 

{{% scripture p="2 Thessalonians 2:3-4 (NKJV)" %}} 

**3** Let no one deceive you by any means; for *that Day will not come* unless the falling away comes first, and the man of sin is revealed, the son of perdition, **4** who opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God or that is worshiped, so that he sits as God in the temple of God, showing himself that he is God.                                 

{{% /scripture %}} 



### **6. Redeeming the Time- The Danger of Complacency**  

redeeming-the-time-the-danger-of-complacency

There is perhaps no greater danger among believers today than complacency. How any person spends their free time will tell you a lot about their life’s priorities and how much they love God. But before we elaborate a bit more, let’s be clear that those who spend more time with God don’t necessarily love Him more per se. God calls all believers to different things, which means that some will need to spend more time studying the Word and others less. We must also factor in ministry and personal application of the truth. Anyone can spend all the time they want with the Lord on any given day. But if they aren’t applying the truth they have learned, they only waste their time going through the motions but not living out what they learn (**James 1:22-25**). Technically, we are all hypocrites by nature because we are all sinners who transgress against God every day. But there are unacceptable levels that God will not tolerate. On the other hand, acceptable ones are pleasing to the Lord, such as a believer who is growing and advancing spiritually. People like this will see the results of pursuing God’s work of sanctification as they continue to improve in their application of the truth. 

 In this ministry, we have already mentioned that eternal reward is all about how much one produces in proportion to what they have. Every Christian “has” different work to do with varying periods and preparations needed. What matters is how well each person carries out their specific task. It can be very easy to spend hours praying and studying the Word and look down on those who do it less. Of course, we could ALL be doing more every day. But doing a little daily and slowly working one’s way up is better than trying to do four-plus hours one day but nothing the next. Everyone should do what they can with the time they have. Everyone needs to make sure that they have ample time set aside for prayer, Bible reading/study, and ministry. On top of that, the believer has other, lesser priorities such as family, work, chores, and perhaps diet and exercise. 

{{% scripture p="1 Timothy 4:8-10 (NIV)" %}} 

**8** For physical training is of some value, but godliness has value for all things, holding promise for both the present life and the life to come. **9** This is a trustworthy saying that deserves full acceptance. **10** That is why we labor and strive, because we have put our hope in the living God, who is the Savior of all people, and especially of those who believe.                                                                      

{{% /scripture %}} 

Eating healthy and exercising is a good use of any free time outside of our spiritual priorities. If there is one thing (aside from being rich to God and loving others) worth investing in, it is our physical bodies. Yes, they will decay as they age, but taking care of them through proper diet and physical activity is a godly approach to life. We want to bring glory to the Lord in everything we do, so why not properly manage these physical, temporary shells that house our human spirits? Our bodies belong to the Lord, meaning we should honor Him with them if and when we can. There is nothing wrong with not working out or eating healthy consistently, but sinful behavior can emerge when our bodies deteriorate because we abuse them through neglect. If we begin to have major, life-threatening health issues we could help or prevent through personal initiation (good diet and exercise), then not taking action is sinful because it’s like telling God that we don’t care. In essence, we are wishing ourselves dead (in extreme cases).  

Many individuals are naturally healthy and don’t need to work out or eat exceptionally well. We aren’t talking about people like that. We refer to those whose health is abysmal due to their poor lifestyle. Also, this writer wishes to encourage people to become active, not compel or force. There can be no legalism here because there is nothing sinful about those already well-off not choosing to become active. This is an area of application. But there are many benefits to eating right and keeping on the move, so we should encourage everyone to pursue this lifestyle. Proper diet and exercise will help with our overall mental and physical health, which can (indirectly) aid in receiving and applying the truth of God’s Word more effectively. However, we must be careful not to go too far with this whole concept because some of the greatest believers now and of all time have been poor and persecuted, and malnourished. We Christians are often at our best when deprived, a condition we will may all experience during our lifetimes. We may very well get to experience all of this first-hand during the tribulation when much of what we have will be taken away from us. 

Also, there are many great believers worldwide today who are perhaps malnourished. They are not less spiritually mature simply based on something out of their control. True spiritual success depends on how we use our free will, not on what we eat. Plus, living the Christian life may entail sacrificing things we often utilized. Deprivation and suffering often cause us to react more zealously by forcing us to rely more on God and less on ourselves. That is why trials, tribulations, and hardships are so important. They may force us to relinquish some of our past habits if absolutely necessary. 

Also, some people can’t afford the best food or don’t have the time or the means to pursue physical fitness. Yet all that matters is that they are doing what God wants them to do. So, to conclude, it is an excellent idea for believers to eat right and stay active if they can do so. But they don’t have to if they don’t need or feel led. Eating healthy certainly isn’t a bad idea considering all the unhealthy foods in the stores and restaurants we have today. It may very well be that Satan is attacking humanity indirectly through all the poor food we have on the market. But spiritual solutions always come about through free-will choice. As we grow spiritually, the Lord will guide us to make better decisions in life, a process that will occur naturally over time. 

We have to attend to other vital areas of our lives, such as work, family, and chores/errands. Those things are a necessary part of the life we have to live as humans. And yes, it is ok to have hobbies (which aren’t obligatory) as long as they do not interfere with our relationship with the Lord. But spiritual growth is mandatory for those who genuinely want to please their true Master. It is worth noting that as we continue to grow spiritually, we will begin to see ourselves wanting to spend more time with God and less on things we used to prioritize, such as sports and hobbies. The more we grow, the less time we waste on things that are perfectly fine but not the best use of our time if done to far too great an extent. Balance is critical in all of this. It is good to partake of enjoyable activities to some level because we don’t want to deprive ourselves of things that God has created or brought into our lives to enjoy (whatever the activity or hobby may be). Also, it is good to spend time outdoors in God’s beautiful creation! The activity (assuming it isn’t sinful or weakening our spiritual resolve) isn’t what matters. What is important is that we find at least some time to enjoy ourselves.  The same goes for eating healthily. It is ok and even good to enjoy some less healthy food during the week because God wants us to enjoy the things that He has given us access to. Living the Christian life doesn’t mean we have to throw everything else out (though some things may disappear entirely) but that we moderate them to properly correspond to the amount of time we will need to attend to our spiritual duties. 

 This world and all it contains should always remain in second place to our walk with Jesus Christ, no questions asked. The process of growth, progress, and production must occur if one wants to please God. It just isn’t possible without these things because they cannot remain absent. There must be obedience and a zealous attitude to live one’s best for Christ. If we do this properly by heeding the Spirit’s prodding at every step, then all other areas of life will begin to fall into place. 

Although we have already touched on it, how we pray and study the Word is not important. In other words, the time of day and the amount of time we spend with God matters little as long as we are doing it. It is the inner attitude that matters. Everyone does things differently, and a typical day of Bible reading/study, prayer, and ministry will always vary among individuals. But consistency is key! The best approach is to get into a regular schedule that we do our best to stick with. Of course, Satan will try to oppose this in whatever way he can by throwing whatever distractions and temptations our way. You add to that the fact that our sinful flesh will naturally want to gravitate toward anything but spiritual activity. Our flesh does not like change, especially that which entails it’s arch-enemy, the spirit (**Galatians 5:17-25**). 

Suppose we have fallen into a bad habit of wasting our time throughout the day. For example, let’s say that we have become complacent and lazy in carrying out our daily responsibilities to God. We have developed a habit. Whatever we can learn, we can unlearn. As a wise woman once said regarding tree climbing, “*If you can get yourself up, you can get yourself down*.” If we can teach ourselves to waste time, we can do the same to accomplish the opposite- redeeming the time. The same goes for any habitual sin we may have fallen into. If we can get ourselves into it, we can (by free will and the grace and power of the Holy Spirit) get ourselves out of it. Easier said than done, but all assuredly possible with God’s help (**Matthew 19:26**). The power to improve and do likewise is right within us. We just have to do it on God’s terms (through faith and the Spirit’s control). 

It is best to develop a strict schedule and stick with it. The more consistent we become in our spiritual activities, the greater the wall of protection we build around ourselves against the flesh and all the spiritual darkness of the world. And no, there is no such thing as a believer who doesn’t have time for God. The Lord will always allow every believer the time, resources, and opportunities they need to grow spiritually and please Him. We all have the time; it is our choice whether we take it or not. And it could be that we need to rethink and rework our priorities and habits. Perhaps we need to spend less time doing certain things or work fewer hours in a week if needs be? Maybe we need to look for another job? If anything hinders us from giving ourselves over to God, we must eliminate whatever is necessary. 

Finally, God will never become angry with us just because we failed to read our Bibles and pray on any given day. That is not a sin and should never be something we feel condemned over. There will be times when our routine will be interrupted due to circumstances out of our control, such as traveling or whatever the case may be. Health issues are another one. Or maybe we were too tired or busy? Whatever the reason, missing the occasional day of our typical routine is not a big deal. The issue is whether we allow this to continue when it shouldn’t. The longer we go without the proper spiritual nutrition we need, the more likely we will become complacent and give into sin. Satan isn’t stupid! Therefore, we must always do our best not to expose our vulnerabilities and weakness to him! 

Complacency is already one of the biggest reasons the church is so lukewarm (**Revelation 3:14-22**), a trend no one should want to replicate. It is good to take breaks and get rest, although this doesn’t mean we ever take a break from God (since we need Him at all times). It is ok if we spend less time with the Lord on some days, even if we strive for a strict schedule that entails doing the same thing day in and day out. That is what we mean by strict; being consistent in fulfilling our spiritual duties every day. That doesn’t mean we will spend the same amount of time doing the same things every day, just that we do them daily as is best. We must also consider circumstances. What matters is that we take the time out of our lives to do what needs doing. And we should never view spiritual growth as a chore but as something we want and love to do from a willing heart. Thankfully, with time, the Holy Spirit will grant us a more willing heart that leads to a greater desire to stick with our resolve. 

In the end, there can be no room for complacency in the Christian life. It is very easy to find ourselves advancing well, only for us to sit down, relax, and loosen our grip on our efforts. But the moment we do this is the time when the devil does his best work. There can be no compromise. We must ALWAYS be alert and of a sober mind. 

{{% scripture p="1 Peter 5:8-10 (NIV)" %}} 

**8** Be alert and of sober mind. Your enemy the devil prowls around like a roaring lion looking for someone to devour. **9** Resist him, standing firm in the faith, because you know that the family of believers throughout the world is undergoing the same kind of sufferings. **10** And the God of all grace, who called you to his eternal glory in Christ, after you have suffered a little while, will himself restore you and make you strong, firm and steadfast.                                                                             

{{% /scripture %}} 



### **7. The Danger of Pride and Arrogance** 

the-danger-of-pride-and-arrogance

Pride is one of the most dangerous sins possible because it is at the height of human folly to assume we are better than others or something we are not. Unfortunately, this type of thinking has manifested itself more now than at any other time in history (most likely at least). The more wealthy and advanced we become as a society, the less people feel inclined to rely on God and serve Him with all their hearts. And this problem isn’t limited only to the secular world but also to most of the true church of Jesus Christ consisting of all born-again believers who have become complacent (sound familiar) about fulfilling the mission they were born to complete. 

{{% scripture p="Proverbs 8:13 (NIV)" %}} 

**13** To fear the Lord is to hate evil; I hate pride and arrogance, evil behavior and perverse speech.                                                   

{{% /scripture %}} 

Today, people are more selfish, materialistic, secular, proud, and arrogant than ever before because they have accustomed themselves to the easier life that technological advancement has provided. As the world becomes more civilized with less primitive societies, people begin to see little need to give back to their Maker. However, we don’t need to survey the problems of unbelievers because their condition will only go from bad to worse (except for those who receive the gospel). **2 Timothy 3** clarifies that people would become proud lovers of themselves. But **Revelation 3:14-22** explains that believers would suffer a similar (though less severe) problem. Therefore, we will concern ourselves with the church. 

The sad truth is that pride has caused so many Christians over the past few generations to think that they are better than all the generations that came before simply because they have more and know more about the world around them. But none of these worldly things has anything to do with true spirituality or biblical knowledge. The more education has developed, the more presumptuous Christians have become, thinking that having so much knowledge of the secular world (in whatever field) must equal gnosis and epignosis (true knowledge about God and His Word lived out). But biblical knowledge and worldly thinking do not mix- at all. Zeal without knowledge is not only dangerous; it is useless. That is the big mistake in the church today. Most think of themselves with profound knowledge and zeal when, in reality, they lack those qualities. The self-deceiving nature of pride hides the actual inner realities from a person who believes they stand well when they do not. Their arrogance goes so far that they do not even think they need to examine themselves because they are so well-off in their lives that they must be so special to have received everything they did (**Galatians 6:3**). We must not mix this concept up with the prosperity gospel, which has its differences. 

The problem with the above mentality (lukewarmness) is that it causes people to trust more in themselves and what they have instead of God. If worldly circumstances were far more difficult, then the indifference among the majority in the church would decrease by quite a bit. Thankfully, the tribulation will end this frustrating mindset from those who would prefer to stay in one place as long as they can. The thing is, no believer can live this way forever. We DO need God! He doesn’t need us, but we must rely on Him at all times! No types or changes in circumstances will ever alter that as long as we live in these sin-infested bodies.

The church is undergoing a major prosperity test and failing miserably at it. The more we involve ourselves in the affairs of this life, the more inclined we feel about investing in those things instead of directing most of our efforts toward pleasing our true Master. If the church realized just how much they needed Christ day by day, moment by moment, then they wouldn’t be living the way they are now. The thinking is that being saved is enough, and manifesting a slight change in lifestyle by relying on God to some extent will do the trick. But the reality of this belief system is that we only need to rely on the Lord a little and not as much as possible. That is arrogance in an indirect form. That is like saying a person can live the Christian life their way and God’s simultaneously. But people left by themselves to their own devices can do nothing on their own. We can never take credit for anything we do that is truly good in God’s eyes. We cannot give glory to ourselves because the Lord is due all the credit. It matters little whether people realize this is what they are doing. A person does not have to sense they are acting in pride because good intentions do not affect the truth of the matter in any way. It is perilous to think we are doing a good job and then give ourselves a pat on the back when our spiritual efforts have been subpar.

On the contrary, what is most arrogant is those who (despite thinking otherwise with good intentions) do not wish to learn much truth and take it seriously. The fact that people can **but choose not to** expose their faulty thinking is undeniable proof of that. Refusing to acknowledge a problem and change it is a sign of a hardened heart. 

{{% scripture p="1 John 2:15-17 (NIV)" %}} 

**15** Do not love the world or anything in the world. If anyone loves the world, love for the Father is not in them. **16** For everything in the world—the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life—comes not from the Father but from the world. **17** The world and its desires pass away, but whoever does the will of God lives forever.                                                                                

{{% /scripture %}} 

So what are the dangers of the above on an individual level? The problem and the results are still the same (and do not change) whether we discuss single believers or the church collectively. But what about (to shift the discussion) how pride and arrogance affect the treatment of others? What are the dangers of that? 

Pride, arrogance, and love do not mix. If we possess these negative qualities to such a bad extent and don’t care to grow out of them, that is not an appropriate love for God. And if we do not love our Redeemer as much as we should, then our love for other believers and all people, in general, will lack. A follower of Christ without love is a hypocrite who makes nothing but noise with no impact (**1 Corinthians 13**). A proud and haughty heart is one of the things the Lord hates (**Proverbs 6:17**). We can see very clearly from the example found in **1 Corinthians 12:15-26** that “superiority complexes” developed among those that thought of themselves as better than they were. Certain spiritual gifts were elevated above others, so some began to think of themselves as more important than their brothers and sisters. Pride causes disunity and separates people. It does not stem from love because self-seeking makes the individual the issue instead of the truth and whether the other person receives it. Believers cannot sharpen one another when this attitude is consistent because discussions with people like that almost always become a competition all about ego instead of spiritual growth. 

We all have and will continue to struggle with pride to some extent as long as we remain in these sinful bodies. Plus, we will never be perfect in our applications. But there is a difference between someone aware of their problem with the resolve to fix it and someone who refuses to see themselves as they truly are. Of course, change for those who want to please Jesus won’t necessarily be easy, nor will it come quickly for everyone. Some thinking patterns take time to unlearn through properly taking the Word and keeping it at the forefront of our minds in everything we think. But repentance is necessary. Pride always damages the person who acts in that manner and sets a negative pattern that others may catch onto and think, “*there is nothing wrong with being this way*”. The biggest problem comes when people create their own definition of pride and what it constitutes. But this pattern leads to all kinds of sinful behavior and blinds all those involved therein. We all struggle with pride to some extent, but spiritual growth can never occur absent of any humility and willingness to bring oneself low. The Christian life is all about glorifying God and relying on Him to please Him the best we can. But putting too much self-confidence and self-esteem in oneself wrongfully puts one as the foundation for all their success. It robs God of all the credit due Him and puts the focus more on ourselves. 

{{% scripture p="Matthew 23:11-12 (ESV)" %}} 

**11** The greatest among you shall be your servant. **12** Whoever exalts himself will be humbled, and whoever humbles himself will be exalted.                             

{{% /scripture %}} 

{{% scripture p="Romans 12:3-10 (ESV)" %}} 

**3** For by the grace given to me I say to everyone among you not to think of himself more highly than he ought to think, but to think with sober judgment, each according to the measure of faith that God has assigned. **4** For as in one body we have many members, and the members do not all have the same function, **5** so we, though many, are one body in Christ, and individually members one of another. **6** Having gifts that differ according to the grace given to us, let us use them: if prophecy, in proportion to our faith; **7** if service, in our serving; the one who teaches, in his teaching; **8** the one who exhorts, in his exhortation; the one who contributes, in generosity; the one who leads, with zeal; the one who does acts of mercy, with cheerfulness.                                                       

{{% /scripture %}} 

It is always spiritually dangerous to believe one knows more than what they do or think of oneself as something they are not. When people view themselves and others through a false lens, they will make unfair judgments misaligned with reality. Change through repentance becomes impossible as long as one continues to carry this flawed thinking with them wherever they go. The unity of Christian fellowship will begin to dwindle, and those affected by this behavior may become tempted to sin out of their bitterness toward those who hurt them through their haughty treatment. Plus, the truth gets clouded and often compromised by those involved trying to discern it.

 The good news is that God will not stand by and do nothing at all. If repentance is forthcoming, it may very well come about through divine discipline intended to humble the individual (**Proverbs 16:18**). But there is little hope for the man who scorns chastisement and continues to selfishly walk in his own ways according to his preferred standards. 

{{% scripture p="Proverbs 26:12 (NIV)" %}} 

**12** Do you see a person wise in their own eyes? There is more hope for a fool than for them.                                    

{{% /scripture %}} 

{{% scripture p="Psalm 101:5b" %}} 

The one who has a haughty look and a proud heart, Him I will not endure.                                                               

{{% /scripture %}} 

We live in a day and age (although this has been the reality since the beginning in every generation) where so many people just don’t like to accept that they don’t know the answers to so many things. This point is especially true for many believers who compromise by choosing one or two extremes. Either they give up searching for answers because of disinterest and the unwillingness to overcome the obstacles to get to the bottom of a difficult matter, or they assume they know the truth when they lack sufficient knowledge to give a proper answer. There is no shame in admitting we don’t know something or remaining silent when overhearing a discussion over whatever issue. However, we must never compromise the truth or assume we know it when we don’t. Humility requires patience, the exact ingredient needed to work alongside a humble heart that zealously searches for the answers. No believer should ever just “wing” their answers by throwing whatever pops into their brain onto the table. And they must also never assume that what they have to say is more important than the words of the person next to them without hearing them first. Wherever pride exists, love will be absent. It is a sure sign that we are not attuned to the Holy Spirit’s power. 

All people are fearfully and wonderfully made in the image and likeness of God. It is utter folly to set one’s own standards of what they think defines “better” because that is extreme arrogance to assume that one has more knowledge of the created than the Creator does. God knows every human being better than any of us, and He is not a respecter of person’s or one who shows favoritism and partiality (**Romans 2:11**). It is He and He alone who defines the true qualities, judgments that only He can make. It is always a terrible mistake to look down on others as if one was better or knows more because it is based on fleshly human standards. No person will ever be worth more to God than another because the Lord loves them all and desires everyone to come to the knowledge of the truth. Those who have more value to God in that they obey Him and bring forth (fruit) (as opposed to the unbeliever) are not so because they were any better than those who don’t do so. There is nothing inherently better about any particular believer that makes them any more deserving of eternal life. God is the maker of both the righteous and the wicked, the rich and the poor (**Proverbs 22:2**). It is only because of His grace and what He has done for us that any one of us has the opportunity to receive His offer of salvation. No person would practice righteousness unless God had reached out to us first (**1 John 4:19**). Christ took the initiative, while those who welcome His loving arms respond through the faith He has enabled us to exercise. There is no boasting before Him, which means there is never any room for pride or arrogance. Those who refuse to relinquish “their” way to embrace God’s will seldom succeed. They are only setting themselves and others up for failure. 

{{% scripture p="1 Corinthians 1:18-31 (NIV)" %}} 

**18** For the message of the cross is foolishness to those who are perishing, but to us who are being saved it is the power of God. **19** For it is written: “I will destroy the wisdom of the wise; the intelligence of the intelligent I will frustrate.”  **20** Where is the wise person? Where is the teacher of the law? Where is the philosopher of this age? Has not God made foolish the wisdom of the world? **21** For since in the wisdom of God the world through its wisdom did not know him, God was pleased through the foolishness of what was preached to save those who believe. **22** Jews demand signs and Greeks look for wisdom, **23** but we preach Christ crucified: a stumbling block to Jews and foolishness to Gentiles, **24** but to those whom God has called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God and the wisdom of God. **25** For the foolishness of God is wiser than human wisdom, and the weakness of God is stronger than human strength. **26** Brothers and sisters, think of what you were when you were called. Not many of you were wise by human standards; not many were influential; not many were of noble birth. **27** But God chose the foolish things of the world to shame the wise; God chose the weak things of the world to shame the strong. **28** God chose the lowly things of this world and the despised things—and the things that are not—to nullify the things that are, **29** so that no one may boast before him. **30** It is because of him that you are in Christ Jesus, who has become for us wisdom from God—that is, our righteousness, holiness and redemption. **31** Therefore, as it is written: “Let the one who boasts boast in the Lord.”                                                                                    

{{% /scripture %}} 

Pride and arrogance always cause all kinds of damage. The number of dangers they pose is so numerous that time and space do not permit us to list and examine them here (nor would that be necessary). The message is clear, and the solution to the problem just as much. There can be no playing around with either one of these follies! They are among the most dangerous and subtle sins any believer could commit; the damage they do is manifested enough among those in the church who should know better. All sin is wrong and dangerous, but pride and arrogance present a special kind of risk, one taken that resulted in the very first transgressions ever committed (**Isaiah 14:12-14; Genesis 3:1-6**). The rest is history. 

Where pride is, divisions and errors will occur. We all stumble in many ways, meaning we all act from poor attitudes at varying points in our lives. So we must learn to be patient with those who struggle to practice humility, knowing that none of us are perfect and that it is hypocritical and even arrogant to assume such a person is not worth bearing with. And just because a brother or sister may not be aware of their problem does not mean they will not realize it later. Only the Lord can help us determine who is a real “swine” and who is worth investing in. It is proud to assume we know by deciding ourselves without the Lord’s consent. Time, experience, and the Spirit’s guiding will eventually reveal all such things. 

