---
title: Small Topical Studies- Part 6 
---



### **1. Psalm 131:2- Taking Control of a Difficult Situation** 

psalm-131-2-taking-control-of-a-difficult-situation

{{% scripture p="Psalm 139:13-16" %}} 

**2** But I have calmed and quieted myself, I am like a weaned child with its mother; like a weaned child I am content.

{{% /scripture %}} 

Life always presents difficult situations at various times and periods. The world is more stressful than ever before despite technological advancements and scientific progress. The Christian life already offers plenty of challenges that increase the difficulty we must bear every day. The devil tempts us every day; our flesh constantly wars against our spirits (**Galatians 5:17**), and the Lord leads us through various tests meant to strengthen and refine our faith. Of course, we don’t always undergo testing, just as how Satan doesn’t tempt us all the time (he is not omnipresent). But there are other things that the Lord can use to test our obedience to Him; things that can occur anytime, anyplace, and anywhere. 

There is nothing wrong with stress as long as we don’t use it as an opportunity to sin. Difficult situations and circumstances will always arise sooner or later at different times and places (at home, work, etc.). How, when, and where these aggravating times creep up on us is not what matters. Our Psalms passage presents one of the keys to reacting to a challenging situation. Something difficult doesn’t mean we have to sin in responding to it. Maybe someone is annoying us at work, or we find the tasks assigned to us overwhelming and tough to bear. Perhaps it is the case that our good work ethic means that our higher-ups have decided to dump more work on us. Whatever the case may be, we can always bear the challenge by staying calm and reasoning to our minds the truth we have taken pains to learn, understand, and believe. 

There are many dangers of being good Christians at home while spending time with the Lord but not carrying any of that with us and applying it. Many things will irritate, stress, test, agitate and annoy us. There will be people we will come to dislike (even though we love them as we should). Another thing is that the evil one and our flesh will choose the most inconvenient times and places to throw a stumbling block in our way. But we must never negatively react to these things. At these moments of application, the rubber meets the road and demonstrates before God and others just how strong our faith is. 

Satan loves to hammer away at our greatest weaknesses to wear us out and discourage us from any further efforts. But we must never give him or our flesh any opportunities. If we know we are weak in certain areas or that some of our habits weaken our spiritual resolve, we must immediately rid ourselves of them (speaking of bad habits). There comes a time with continued spiritual growth when all believers know how to combat their struggles properly. The issue will no longer be a matter of knowing but of doing. Of course, no sinful behavior ever occurred because we never knew what to do. After all, our Lord never tests or allows us to be tempted above what we can bear (**1 Corinthians 10:13**). We knew the solution but refused to take it. And if our knowledge of spiritual combat and testing are slim, then it is our job to take the initiative and grow up spiritually to ready ourselves for all attacks that will come our way. If we fail to grow spiritually, we fail to implement the solution to all our problems. 

We have already mentioned in another study just how dangerous pride is. But two other spiritual hazards also present a trap to our spiritual advance; fear and anger. For example, let’s say a problematic situation arises, and it forces us to apply what we know or to disregard the truth. Continuous anger is always dangerous because allowing our stress and agitation to override all reason and rationale will cause us to fall into a pattern of constant error. Habitual anger is a choice likened to putting our sinful habits on machine-gun fire because we become less restrained over ourselves. When we allow our wrath to rule us, we open up a floodgate of all kinds of other possibilities that will manifest themselves to the worst possible degree. Anger is like alcohol that makes us lose control of our free will and cause us to make all kinds of poor decisions.

On the other hand, a little anger is not sinful as long as we control and quell it quickly. In essence, losing our tempers to such a degree that it causes us to sin is the same as temporarily rebelling against God and saying, “*I don’t care what I think, say, or do at this point*!” Worse yet, we begin to justify our actions based on the belief that we feel we have been wronged or have every reason to get upset. That may be true, but we never have a right or excuse to sin because of that! 

Whenever anger comes, we must get it under control as quickly as possible. As our Psalms passage says, we must develop a lifestyle of calming our hearts and minds and everything else that attempts to take control of us. We must exercise self-control and allow the spirit to calm and soothe our minds with the truth we have stored in our hearts. Calmly reacting to setbacks, confrontations, difficult circumstances, and situations is the key to combating and defeating sin. We need to remind ourselves that sin is never worth it and that giving in to it will never do us any good. It is always better to suffer for doing what is right than doing what is wrong (**1 Peter 3:17**). We must keep in mind that improper conduct is just what our adversary wants. Therefore, we must ask ourselves, “*Do I really want this*?”

True, righteous anger may require us to take action and do something about an issue within our control that we can solve. In fact, we may need to do something (whatever the circumstance may be). But there will be things we cannot change, nor should we try to if we know this for a fact. Israel made the mistake of grumbling in the desert when things didn’t go their way. They also had a habit of giving into fear when they viewed certain obstacles as too great to overcome through the Lord’s strength. The twelve spies sent by Moses to survey the promised land committed this same mistake which caused them to doubt God’s ability to deliver their enemies into their hands. 

Fear can be just as deadly to our faith because it has a nasty habit of paralyzing our trust in God whenever we face opposition. Constant worry and anxiety will also dominate other areas of our life, including our quiet time with the Lord. Fear discourages and hampers the Christian life! How can we benefit from the truth if we never muster the courage to believe it? What benefits do we derive from prayer and Bible reading if our minds are never focused but constantly occupied with distressing thoughts? It is never possible to walk in the spirit when we don’t focus our minds on the Lord and His Word. That is why Isaiah 26:3 states, “*You will keep in perfect peace, **Whose mind is stayed on you, because he trusts in you***.” If we allow fear to dominate, we permit it to take over lives. 

David was a man whose life was filled with much distress and peril on all sides. It is highly doubtful that any believer today could withstand the great tests that this man of God underwent because the most demanding challenges always confront the most zealous believers (David was one of them). David’s enemies pursued him time after time so that he often felt as if there was never any rest or peace in his life. The reality is what told him otherwise. David combated his troubles with the truth to turn the lie on its head, the only possible way to defeat any opposition. He learned to calm and quiet himself down by thinking about the reality of everything he had to face. He knew God was with him and that He (and not himself) was the source of his strength. That is what it means to calm and quiet ourselves down, a process we can only undertake by putting our complete trust in the Lord. Our fate or destiny lies in God’s hands so that we need not trouble ourselves over people who step out of line or stressful circumstances out of our control. Nothing lasts forever, and the end will always be better than the beginning if we would but continue to cast our burdens on the Lord. David had a habit of encouraging himself in the Lord, but faith and truth were still necessary for that to occur. Without faith, we cannot comfort ourselves no matter how hard we try. But when we trust in the Lord, we believe that He is in control which gives us peace of mind and takes the burden of trying to fix the problem ourselves off our shoulders. But whenever we try to solve a problem by taking matters into our own hands, we are in for a disturbing experience that will see no end until we acknowledge our helplessness before the Lord. 



### **2. Training through Discipline- Don’t Despise it!** 

training-through-discipline-dont-despise-it

{{% scripture p="Hebrews 12:5-11 (NIV)" %}} 

**5** And have you completely forgotten this word of encouragement that addresses you as a father addresses his son? It says, “My son, do not make light of the Lord’s discipline, and do not lose heart when he rebukes you, **6** because the Lord disciplines the one he loves, and he chastens everyone he accepts as his son.” **7** Endure hardship as discipline; God is treating you as his children. For what children are not disciplined by their father? **8** If you are not disciplined—and everyone undergoes discipline—then you are not legitimate, not true sons and daughters at all. **9** Moreover, we have all had human fathers who disciplined us and we respected them for it. How much more should we submit to the Father of spirits and live! **10** They disciplined us for a little while as they thought best; but God disciplines us for our good, in order that we may share in his holiness. **11** No discipline seems pleasant at the time, but painful. Later on, however, it produces a harvest of righteousness and peace for those who have been trained by it.           

{{% /scripture %}} 

The truth of this matter we discuss is that we won’t always know if something was meant to be discipline or not because our discernment is never perfect. We don’t remember every sin we commit every day, do we? Then neither will we **always** be able to pick out whether something was discipline or not. The intention of discipline can still be fulfilled and thus heeded by us whether we understand that this type of reaction from our Lord is a test or discipline.  All that matters is that we learn from these sobering experiences to better our walk with Him. So if the sting of chastisement has its intended effects, then failing to realize what we just went through is not the end of the world. The Lord always wants to see us repent of our behavior by confessing and moving on from it. If we do this, we respond to the Lord’s handling of us accordingly. The fact that we don’t always distinguish discipline from testing falls back on the truth that we are imperfect human beings who don’t catch everything. God wants us to react appropriately to His response to our wrongdoing, but telling the difference between a test and a “spanking” isn’t always easy, nor is it a distinction we make perfectly every time. 

The inner convictions of the Holy Spirit and the instinct within our believing hearts (assuming they are under the Spirit’s control) will tell us to handle any circumstances in a godly way whether we realize what we are undergoing or not. So it may be the case that we either react appropriately or not simply based on the fact that the present difficulties brought on by the Lord cause us to rely on and trust Him more. But just because our assessment of the situation is never perfect does not mean we should automatically run to conclusions and assume that our present hardships result from our negative choices. The other extreme is to presume that discipline meant to refine our faith is testing and that God is honoring our so-called “good behavior” when that is not the case. In other words, we don’t want to mix up discipline with testing and vice versa. If we are not sure which it is for whatever reason, it is best to respond to the present ordeal in a way that pleases the Lord, just as He intended. We don’t always technically need to know why this or that came about. Instead, we need to allow it to cause us to better our behavior and relationship with the Lord. Some things may be clear to us, while others will be less transparent. Since we aren’t perfect, our knowledge of all situations will never be complete. 

There is also the issue of how long discipline lasts and how difficult it can become. Then you have the question of, “*What constitutes discipline*?” We know with certainty that God will never bring more upon our heads than we can bear, so He would never inflict any hardships on us that would swamp our faith. The level of difficulty depends on the severity of the wrongdoing and its duration and consistency. The more we sin, the greater the discipline. But never will it be so much that it doesn’t correspond to our spiritual maturity. God never allows us to be tempted or tested beyond what we can handle (**1 Corinthians 10:13**), so never will we ever have to worry about facing something out of our control. Of course, God never tempts anyone to sin (**James 1:13-18**) but tests us to see how we will react. Tests are from God, while temptations are from the evil one. 

On the other hand, there are plenty of times we can adequately determine whether the Lord is disciplining us. Some of it is obvious, while some are not. But God won’t “penalize” us for every sin we commit, but more likely for harmful habitual patterns we have developed and refused to get out of up to a certain point. Mature believers who have mastered their sinful habits are far less likely to receive discipline when there is no reoccurring pattern. But even they too can and will occasionally lapse once in a while. However, the stronger their faith becomes, the less frequent and intense these episodes. Plus, these individuals have learned from years of experience and through disciplinary training to check all bad behavior as quickly as possible so that it doesn’t get out of control. Even just one sin can lead to a disaster that results in a plethora of problems if not dealt with properly. But those who have yet to develop a more acceptable (in God’s eyes) level of control over their sinful tendencies will receive more of what they are rightfully due. The more we disobey, the greater the amount of corrective behavior the Lord will have to inflict on us. 

Next, a question we have not answered is what discipline entails. There is no direct answer because our heavenly Father can use any means at His disposal to get the message through to our heads. There are various ways He could do this (sickness and mental anguish being two of the many options), so many that we could never discuss even close to all of them. Therefore, we will continue our main discussion. 

As we should already know, discipline and punishment are not the same things when contrasting believers and unbelievers. Punishment involves God condemning people for refusing to choose for Him. At the same time, discipline entails the Lord chastising faithful followers with the intent of getting them to turn around and do away with that which threatens their relationship with Him. So God never “punishes” believers in the sense that he does with those who reject Him, a truth John 3:18 clarifies well. 

{{% scripture p="John 3:18 (NIV)" %}} 

**18** Whoever believes in him is not condemned, but whoever does not believe stands condemned already because they have not believed in the name of God’s one and only Son.                                                                            

{{% /scripture %}} 

Verse eight in our Hebrews passage has caused a lot of fear in the hearts of many believers because it states, “*If you are not disciplined—and everyone undergoes discipline—then you are not legitimate, not true sons and daughters at all*.” Some brothers and sisters have taken what they see as a “lack” of discipline in their lives as a possible indicator that their faith is illegitimate and that they stand condemned. But the truth is that all believers receive discipline and don’t always perceive it when it comes their way. It may not be apparent to us what is going on, so we assume otherwise that our circumstances are something else or nothing entirely. Or we don’t pay attention and take little notice of the events that befall us whenever they occur. But if a person is a true believer who has put their faith and trust in the person and work of Jesus Christ, then they are saved. And if that is the case, they have had their share of discipline, whether they realize it or not. Therefore, their perception is off, which ties into what we said above about believers not always being aware of what is going on when God decides to teach them a lesson. Just because someone is oblivious to something doesn’t mean it isn’t happening. If we pay better attention by heeding the Spirit (not the same thing as worrying or obsessing), we are far more likely to see the pattern that occurs whenever we er in our conduct for an extended period. It takes time, growth, and increased spiritual maturity to improve in this area, even though our knowledge of all that happens to us will never be perfect. Discipline trains those who learn from it. 

Next in our brief discussion is how to react to discipline and how not to handle it. Verse 5b in Hebrews twelve warns us against two dangers that improperly approaching discipline can cause. First, it says, “*My son, **do not make light** of the Lord’s discipline,* *and **do not lose heart** when he rebukes you*.” Discipline is the Lord’s way of rebuking us, as in, He isn’t standing right next to us and scolding us as another person would. We cannot see our true Master physically, though we can discern His still small voice. Instead, the Lord’s actions toward us speak for themselves whether we realize what is going on or not. We have a choice to either repent or rebel. But disobedience can manifest itself in the two ways we have in bold above. If we take our “whipping” lightly, we are complacent and could care less about our present behavior because we have become indifferent. Admittedly, all believers commit this error many times throughout their lives. It may take multiple “beatings” till the message gets through and we finally come to our senses and do away with all that which brought the trouble on us. But not every heeds the warnings and continues to ignore them to their own peril, which can result in the abandonment of faith altogether. The reader should already know what apostasy is and the common causes and “side effects” of it. It is not possible to keep sinning without eventually destroying one’s faith. A person will not remain a believer forever if they don’t ever stop their immoral lifestyle because sin destroys faith just as fire burns paper. 

The other danger of negatively responding to spiritual chastisement is to allow it to overwhelm and swamp our faith. But we have already discussed that God would never let us face something if He knew we could never handle it, and that goes for all discipline. There have been many cases of believers who have embittered themselves toward the Lord because they don’t want to take responsibility for their actions; we discussed that already. The other case involves individuals who feel God has wronged them because His treatment of them is too harsh or too great for them to bear. They may give into such terrible grief and anguish that they feel they can no longer continue fighting the good fight. Yet they fail to realize that their faith is strong enough to face the present situation and endure it. That is why verse seven says to “*endure hardship as discipline*.” We never want to make Job’s mistake and assume that God no longer loves us and that He has “wronged” us. We know that our Savior is perfect and can do no wrong, so why would we ever reason to ourselves that what has befallen us is unfair? It is not only just; it is loving and gracious because arduous trials such as these come upon us to protect and safeguard our eternal salvation and the eternal rewards that come with it. God wants us to spend eternity with Him and to store up as many treasures in His kingdom as we can. But grumbling and complaining against the One who wants to give us more than we could ever imagine defeats the whole purpose of the happy life we want to live as human beings. Living the Christian life is challenging but the most joyful and fulfilling. How much more happy could we be in eternity! That will be a life as good as it gets! 

{{% scripture p="Romans 8:18 (NIV)" %}} 

**18** I consider that our present sufferings are not worth comparing with the glory that will be revealed in us.                                                          

{{% /scripture %}} 

It isn’t always easy to bear up under the consequences of our actions. But we must remember to see them as they are! Not sure if something is discipline or a test? Either way, we know that both are for our own good because God has our best intentions in mind. 

{{% scripture p="Jeremiah 29:10-12 (NKJV)" %}} 

**10** For thus says the Lord: After seventy years are completed at Babylon, I will visit you and perform My good word toward you, and cause you to return to this place. **11** For I know the thoughts that I think toward you, says the Lord, thoughts of peace and not of evil, to give you a future and a hope. **12** Then you will call upon Me and go and pray to Me, and I will listen to you.                                   

{{% /scripture %}} 

As Jeremiah 29:10-12 indicates, God always wants what is best for us whether we believe His ways are always better or not. The sole purpose of exiling Israel to Babylon was to get them to see the error of their ways and repent. But if we don’t genuinely desire to change the course of our lives for the better, then the discipline will get heavier and the dangers all the greater. God will not listen to us if we aren’t willing to take up our cross daily and follow Him. No one who is unwilling to do this wants to change. Instead, they would prefer to go through the motions and practice a ritual of “confessing” their sins so that they can turn around and do it again. In other words, they want to have life both ways. 

Indeed, real repentance won’t always result in exceptional spiritual maturity overnight. Some people may have fallen into such a bad pattern for so long that progress is slow and difficult. But what matters is that change is occurring and that the individual is recovering. The more seriously they take their resolve, the faster they will come to recovery. Of course, there is no excuse for any sins along the way because all sin is evil. But we are all sinners, which is why we have grace that considers all of our weakness, whatever and however many they may be. Overcoming habitual sin can take time and a lot of pain. But victory will come to those who persevere in their efforts empowered by the Spirit. 

{{% scripture p="2 Corinthians 12:9-10 (NKJV)" %}} 

**9** But he said to me, “My grace is sufficient for you, for my power is made perfect in weakness.” Therefore I will boast all the more gladly about my weaknesses, so that Christ’s power may rest on me. **10** That is why, for Christ’s sake, I delight in weaknesses, in insults, in hardships, in persecutions, in difficulties. For when I am weak, then I am strong.                                                                  

{{% /scripture %}} 



### **3. What Makes a Good Spouse-Marriage?** 

what-makes-a-good-spouse-marriage

{{% scripture p="Proverbs 18:22 (ESV)" %}} 

**22** He who finds a wife finds a good thing and obtains favor from the Lord.                                               

{{% /scripture %}} 

{{% scripture p="Proverbs 31:10 (NIV)" %}} 

**10** A wife of noble character who can find? She is worth far more than rubies.                                              

{{% /scripture %}} 

{{% scripture p="Colossians 3:19 (ESV)" %}} 

**19** Husbands, love your wives, and do not be harsh with them.                   

{{% /scripture %}} 

Below, we will examine what makes a good marriage and partner and why this is so important. God instituted marriage to keep the human population going and represent His relationship with believers that constitute His bride, the church (**Ephesians 5:25-27**). So it is not something to be taken lightly, as if one could just casually put in the efforts required to maintain it. On the contrary, it is a commitment that demands great sacrifice and continued spiritual growth. If a married man or woman’s walk with Christ begins to suffer and take a nosedive, chances are that the couple will struggle in their relationship. Next thing you know, they start thinking, speaking, and behaving toward each other as they shouldn’t. If they cannot learn how to manage their spiritual duties, then they will more likely slack off in fulfilling their rights and obligations to one another. The same principle applies to raising their children (**1 Timothy 3:5**). In this context (1 Timothy 3:5), this passage refers to pastors specifically. But we can apply this teaching to a broader group of married believers raising children. 

It is sad to see the high divorce rate in our society. Unfortunately, many Christians are struggling with this very same problem, often (though not always) due to issues they could resolve by handling it in a godly manner. However, we need to consider that it isn’t always both people’s fault. 

 No, many struggles won’t go away overnight because spiritual growth is a process that takes time. So no man or woman should expect immediate results that will resolve the issue within a few days. Chances are that won’t happen. But what matters is that both partners are trying to improve in their daily walk with the Lord. All those who genuinely wish to change will do so. If there is no improvement in a person’s spiritual life, it is ALWAYS because they never wanted to change. The solution to all problems is spiritual growth. Yes, it sounds like a simple answer because it is. However, it is also true that it is easier said than done. 

It is best to conclude our question by simply stating that the quality of a man or woman’s love for God will determine how good of a partner they will be. The more they love Jesus Christ, the more love they will bestow on the partner He brings into their lives. And we can rest assured that God has the very best person in mind for all those He calls to marriage so that it will always be a perfect fit. So if a marriage is struggling or not working out, we can never blame the Lord because every good and perfect gift comes from above (**James 1:17**). His goal is to prosper, not harm us (**Jeremiah 29:11**)! People may change, but God never does! His loving care for us never fades because He is always faithful and righteous. So how can a man and a woman increasing in their faithfulness with God not improve in their relationship with one another? If we claim to be growing in Christ day by day, then any marriage should prosper, even if the path toward that goal is bumpy and uneven. Marriage, like the Christian life, is not easy. But nothing worth having in this life ever comes easy! So to receive an excellent husband or wife from the Lord means that said individuals had to have undergone the tremendous spiritual efforts involved before being united together by Christ. This does not mean reaching perfection (that isn’t possible) but that both are (in the Lord’s eyes) ready to take on their responsibilities to each other (assuming the Lord brought them together in His good time). 

And this truth leads us to state that all those ready and prepared for marriage are those who have learned to be content in their relationship with their faithful spiritual husband, our dear Lord and Savior. In other words, they need to have grown up to spiritual maturity to some extent first, not the other way around. All believers need to make God their first and foremost priority before sacrificing for another human being. If we have not learned to give things up and suffer for the Lord, we are more likely to lack in giving up many things to prosper with a marriage partner. Remember, human marriage represents our standing with our heavenly Father. Since our Lord expects us to replicate that to the best possible degree through human relationships, we must remember what kind of a testimony a good or bad marriage will give to those around us. We are ambassadors of Christ held to high standards due to the nature of our work and mission in life. So we cannot afford to take these matters lightly. 

{{% scripture p="2 Timothy 2:3-7 (ESV)" %}} 

**3** Share in suffering as a good soldier of Christ Jesus. **4** No soldier gets entangled in civilian pursuits, since his aim is to please the one who enlisted him. **5** An athlete is not crowned unless he competes according to the rules. **6** It is the hard-working farmer who ought to have the first share of the crops. **7** Think over what I say, for the Lord will give you understanding in everything.                                        

{{% /scripture %}} 

Since God tests all believers, we can be rest assured that every marriage will see its fair share of trials and tribulations. If undergoing a spiritual test, then the Lord would not have led the couple to it only to destroy their relationship. The whole point of experiencing such difficult times is to get the two individuals to rely on the Lord to increase their faith. And if both the man and woman bear up under these difficulties, their increased love for God will enlarge their love and care for one another. So to those who ask, “*How can I love my husband/wife more*?” The answer is to love God more. And serving the Lord is always a matter of choice, so this obligation is always a decision they must make. Failing to do the right thing when one can do so is not something we can blame on God because our choices always come back on us. 

But in this difficult time of the church we live in now, finding a man or woman whose love for the Lord exceeds that of the typical lukewarm attitude is extremely difficult. Those who have a higher regard for God’s Word and living it out will be the minority of Christians who truly understand their purpose and mission in life. There are very few believers in today’s church with high standards for the truth. Instead, most are indifferent and take it lightly because they don’t see it as important. But does this mean that those who do love it as they should are doomed to remain single the rest of their lives? Absolutely not! God does call some people to refrain from marriage, but many He leads to pursue it. For those He wishes to not remain by themselves, He will bring around the right person at the right time. There is nothing to worry about because God will bring the right man or woman into a believer’s life when they are ready. The person and timing are all the Lord’s choice and in His control. Do we not trust that He will bring us the very best fit? He did for Adam when He created Eve (**Genesis 2:18-25**), and so He has done for all faithful believers after that. The best thing for every young man and woman of God to do is to grow spiritually. Everyone is different, so how God brings two individuals together will vary from individual to individual, an application area requiring every believer to do what the Lord is leading them to do. “*Should I go out and start looking? Or should I hold back*? *Or should I do both*? How should I go about looking?” The Lord will make these answers clear through time spent growing in the Word. What may be unclear now will become transparent later on (**Isaiah 40:31**). 

Indeed, those who aren’t caught up in the lukewarm trends of today’s church must have higher standards for those they marry. Believers less serious about the truth will naturally gravitate toward those of lesser spiritual maturity themselves. They will, in all likelihood, share a similar mindset. But that doesn’t mean that the more faithful won’t ever find anyone just because the pickings are slimmer. They need to understand that the person the Lord brings into their life may not agree with much of what they believe at first. All that matters is that the potential spouse is serious and committed enough to change their attitude. It is the attitude of the other person that matters. All of this will occur because both need to be serious about the truth if they will prosper and not stumble over one another. Of course, that doesn’t mean a husband and wife will agree on everything because they never will. But they will share a similar zeal that will result in consistently believing the same things. And although one of them may have been wrong on many issues when they first met, they will (assuming this person was chosen for the other by God) slowly but surely begin to unravel and change their beliefs and way of thinking toward the truth. Some people will have a lot of “unlearning” to do, you might say. It is the other person’s attitude which is key. All that matters is that the potential partner is onboard with the other spiritually so that change through growth will occur. 

{{% scripture p="Proverbs 31:30 (NIV)" %}} 

**30** Charm is deceptive, and beauty is fleeting; but a woman who fears the Lord is to be praised.                                

{{% /scripture %}} 

Physical attraction is definitely part of the equation when it comes to selecting a lifelong partner. However, there can be variables with this because not everyone finds their spouse or fiancée overly attractive. Let’s just say that they are attractive enough for them to want to marry them. But viewpoints will vary on whether or not one believer has to be physically attracted to the other for the relationship to work. So it is better for us not to be dogmatic here, even if most people would never date someone they didn’t find physically appealing. But although appearance does matter to some extent for most people when it comes to who they choose to marry, it is always best not to get too hung up on looks because it is the inner quality of a person that matters (**1 Peter 3:4**). The person God brings into our lives is likely someone we will be physically attracted to, so there should be no reason to worry on that end. And, of course, beauty is in the eye of the beholder. But good outward qualities (as defined by so and so) do not guarantee that an individual is a good person who fears the Lord as they should. As **1 Samuel 16:7** shows, godliness has nothing to do with outward appearance but everything to do with the disposition of a person’s heart. And, as Proverbs 31:30 states, good looks won’t last forever because our bodies will decay and break down over time (**2 Corinthians 4:16**). But a growing faith will manifest a greater level of beauty the more it grows. 

{{% scripture p="1 Peter 3:1-6 (NIV)" %}} 

Wives, in the same way submit yourselves to your own husbands so that, if any of them do not believe the word, they may be won over without words by the behavior of their wives, **2** when they see the purity and reverence of your lives. **3** Your beauty should not come from outward adornment, such as elaborate hairstyles and the wearing of gold jewelry or fine clothes. **4** Rather, it should be that of your inner self, the unfading beauty of a gentle and quiet spirit, which is of great worth in God’s sight. **5** For this is the way the holy women of the past who put their hope in God used to adorn themselves. They submitted themselves to their own husbands, **6** like Sarah, who obeyed Abraham and called him her lord. You are her daughters if you do what is right and do not give way to fear.                          

{{% /scripture %}} 

The passage above reinforces our points about emphasizing the internal over the external. Wives and husbands need to ensure their behavior aligns with God’s Word instead of unnecessarily distracting themselves with physical trappings. There is nothing wrong with wanting to look good, but our number one priority is how our inner self manifests itself around others. Appearances (by themselves) won’t positively influence another because only a good heart toward God demonstrated through a godly lifestyle can make any difference in another person’s life (we are to be salt to others). 

Our passage also emphasizes the need for wives to submit to their husbands as spiritual leaders. A godly woman knows what it means to fear the Lord and shows it by properly orientating herself toward the one He has put in authority over her. Now this doesn’t make men better in any way but exists to replicate (symbolize) the spiritual relationship we the church (the bride) have with our Husband (Christ). Also, it only goes as far as marriage itself because no man not married to a certain woman has any right to exercise authority over her. Men only have leadership over women in a marriage relationship or a local church from a pastoral office. 

The book of Proverbs does not shy away from attacking the poor attitude of a wife who refuses to submit. Sometimes, there is nothing worse than a henpecker who constantly argues and patronizes their spouse. Disregarding the proper relationship a wife should have with her husband is a serious matter that challenges God’s authority because the woman refuses to accept the way God has ordained things to work. We never want to make the mistake Israel made when they challenged God by refusing to listen to Moses. 

{{% scripture p="Proverbs 21:9 (NIV)" %}} 

**9** Better to live on a corner of the roof than share a house with a quarrelsome wife.                                     

{{% /scripture %}} 

On the other hand, husbands must love their wives as their own bodies in a gentle, caring, and understanding way (**1 Peter 3:7**). 

{{% scripture p="Colossians 3:19 (NIV)" %}} 

**19** Husbands, love your wives and do not be harsh with them.                   

{{% /scripture %}} 

{{% scripture p="Ephesians 5:24-33 (NIV)" %}} 

**24** Now as the church submits to Christ, so also wives should submit to their husbands in everything. **25** Husbands, love your wives, just as Christ loved the church and gave himself up for her **26** to make her holy, cleansing her by the washing with water through the word, **27** and to present her to himself as a radiant church, without stain or wrinkle or any other blemish, but holy and blameless. **28** In this same way, husbands ought to love their wives as their own bodies. He who loves his wife loves himself. **29** After all, no one ever hated their own body, but they feed and care for their body, just as Christ does the church— **30** for we are members of his body. **31** “For this reason a man will leave his father and mother and be united to his wife, and the two will become one flesh.” **32** This is a profound mystery—but I am talking about Christ and the church. **33** However, each one of you also must love his wife as he loves himself, and the wife must respect her husband.                                        

{{% /scripture %}} 

There are no few instances throughout human history of husbands physically and verbally abusing their wives, a sad reality that (although far less common) has and continues to occur in the church. The two extremes Scripture warns us against are women disrespecting their husbands' leadership through insubordination and men abusing it as an excuse to lord themselves over their spouse. We must avoid these things at all costs, something only possible through trust and obedience to Jesus Christ. 



### **5. Should We Make Logistical Preparations for the Tribulation?**

logistical-preparations-for-the-tribulation-facing-martyrdom

Many people unnecessarily stress themselves about how to prepare for the dark days of the coming tribulation. The best and only answer to give on being ready for it is to build up faith through spiritual growth, progress, and production (**Jude 20-25**). The Bible already answers all of these questions for us! We don’t need to become anxious by worrying whether or not we will know when the tribulation has begun and what it will accompany. We will understand all these things (assuming we have studied God’s Word thoroughly and made adequate spiritual preparations) when we see and experience them when they come. And for those truly committed believers who don’t know what is going on at first, it will soon become clear enough (as the passage below shows). 

{{% scripture p="Revelation 8:1-5 (ESV)" %}} 

**1** When the Lamb opened the seventh seal, there was silence in heaven for about half an hour. **2** Then I saw the seven angels who stand before God, and seven trumpets were given to them. **3** And another angel came and stood at the altar with a golden censer, and he was given much incense to offer with the prayers of all the saints on the golden altar before the throne, **4** and the smoke of the incense, with the prayers of the saints, rose before God from the hand of the angel. **5** Then the angel took the censer and filled it with fire from the altar and threw it on the earth, and there were peals of thunder, rumblings, flashes of lightning, and an earthquake. 

{{% /scripture %}} 

We may not be able to know the exact day or month when all these things will come about, but we can understand the signs of the times (**Matthew 16:3**) to help us realize that those testing days are near. Matthew 24 and, of course, the book of Revelation gives us some idea of what the “apocalypse” will look like. But there will, no doubt, be many details that we won’t quite yet see or understand, meaning that we may not know as much as we may want to. All that matters is that we know the God we serve (**Daniel 11:32**) and believe in all the promises He has given us in Scripture. The best thing to do is not worry about the future but concentrate instead on the present and whether we are where we should be. In other words, we don’t need to worry. 

It is not wrong to make logistical preparations for the tribulation as long as the person doing so understands that spiritual advance is the best and primary way they should be readying themselves ahead of time. They should not trust in their resources, as if failing to stock up means they won’t be ready once the time comes. Our trust is in the Lord, not in food, clothing, or whatever we may stash away. So bracing oneself in this manner is fine if done with proper reasons and motives. The person doing this needs to understand that whatever they have now will not benefit them nearly as much as the least amount of spiritual preparation beforehand. Plus, they may lose all they stored away or never end up getting to use any of it when the great moment arrives. There is a tremendous risk that so much hope is put in food and material possessions that faith won't survive the onslaught of tests and persecution when they fail to help (due to whatever circumstances unknown to us in the future). So either said person wasted too much time focusing on the wrong things (distracting them from growing in the Word), or they put so much faith in less crucial matters that they buckle under pressure when all the preparations they underwent fail. Now, this doesn’t imply that those who are getting ready in this manner are doomed to spiritual failure; many have and will do this only to realize the futility of such an endeavor once they see how useless it is/was. And it is most certainly possible that such preparations may prove to be an effective asset that works later on (perhaps God will use the resources to help other believers in need during those days). But the point is that whatever a person has now is something they could very quickly lose before they even get to enjoy it. The most important thing any Christian can emphasize is their spiritual health and whether it is developing as it should (**2 Peter 3:18**). As long as that is the emphasis and priority, storing up material goods is in no way sinful. Human plans and expectations can change and suffer disruption faster than in a blink of an eye because we never know what tomorrow might bring. 

{{% scripture p="Proverbs 19:21 (NIV)" %}} 

**21** Many are the plans in a person’s heart, but it is the Lord’s purpose that prevails.                                        

{{% /scripture %}} 

{{% scripture p="Proverbs 27:1 (NIV)" %}} 

Do not boast about tomorrow, for you do not know what a day may bring.                                     

{{% /scripture %}} 

Anxiety should never be a driving force in how we choose to prepare ourselves for the future. Anything done without faith is not going about it the right way if we do not trust God (**Romans 14:23**). It is arrogant and insulting to believe that our Lord is not sufficient to calm our nerves and sustain us in our present and future trials because He most certainly is. The problem is when we try to accomplish only something God can do. We are never going to fix any problems ourselves, which is why it is better to boast (appropriately) in our weaknesses and cast all burdens on the Lord (**2 Corinthians 12:9; Psalm 55:22**). 

Finally, Scripture is quite clear that we should never worry about food or clothing or any other earthy necessity because the Lord will provide for our every need whenever we may need them. Psalm 37:25 is a perfect example of this when it states, “*I was young and now I am old, yet I have never seen the righteous forsaken or their children begging bread*.” This passage tells us that although we may suffer deprivation for some time, nothing lasts forever. God will never leave or forsake us (**Hebrews 13:5; Matthew 28:20**) because His words are pure and cannot lie. Our present hardships are not something that will carry into eternity. And suppose it is the Lord’s will for a believer to live on and continue serving Him (assuming martyrdom is not in God’s plan for that individual). In that case, that person will not remain deprived forever, where they are constantly in need and barely able to survive. God will always take care of all His children. And He will ensure their mental, physical, and spiritual well-being, even if He tests them by deploying sickness (as discipline or testing) and spiritual testing to refine their faith for some time. Job and many other giants of the faith are perfect examples of this. 

We believers are not like the unbelieving world with no hope and every reason to despair. We have a heavenly Father looking out for us and looking over our shoulder at every instant. Whatever “hope” the world possess is one that will disappoint. But the believer's will reap them a bountiful crop in eternity. No matter how bad things get, we know that God is working everything out for our very good (**Romans 8:28**). So we must keep in mind at all times that God will sustain us whether we made prior logistical preparations or not. And although we watch for the “signs” and study what the Bible has to say about the end times, we must continue to strive to live in the present and take our walk day by day, moment by moment. Assuming we approach things this way, there will be, in all likelihood, less of a desire to store up food and clothing for the days to come.  The believer will come to realize just how fast time flies when they put their focus on living for Jesus Christ. 

{{% scripture p="Matthew 6:25-34 (NIV)" %}} 

**25** “Therefore I tell you, do not worry about your life, what you will eat or drink; or about your body, what you will wear. Is not life more than food, and the body more than clothes? **26** Look at the birds of the air; they do not sow or reap or store away in barns, and yet your heavenly Father feeds them. Are you not much more valuable than they? **27** Can any one of you by worrying add a single hour to your life? **28** “And why do you worry about clothes? See how the flowers of the field grow. They do not labor or spin. **29** Yet I tell you that not even Solomon in all his splendor was dressed like one of these. **30** If that is how God clothes the grass of the field, which is here today and tomorrow is thrown into the fire, will he not much more clothe you—you of little faith? **31** So do not worry, saying, ‘What shall we eat?’ or ‘What shall we drink?’ or ‘What shall we wear?’ **32** For the pagans run after all these things, and your heavenly Father knows that you need them. **33** But seek first his kingdom and his righteousness, and all these things will be given to you as well. **34** Therefore do not worry about tomorrow, for tomorrow will worry about itself. Each day has enough trouble of its own.                                    

{{% /scripture %}} 











### **Facing Martyrdom** 


Related to the topic above is the subject of martyrdom and how the believer should view it. We need to understand that exiting life in this manner is not something we get to choose to do or not. It is entirely God’s choice on whether He destines us to honor Him in this way. The strongest passage to enhance this reality is one we have mentioned multiple times on this ministry: Revelation 13:10, which demonstrates that whatever God wills and predestines cannot be undone. Whatever He has decreed for the believer's life (He knows it will occur through foreknowledge beforehand) is something He will bring to completion. So the believer who obeys their Him as they should will not be capable of overriding God’s will. But, assuming they remain faithful and don’t cower under pressure, they will obey the Lord’s calling. And the Lord knows who will obey and who will rebel. So the choice every individual believer makes never takes God by surprise because He knew about all their decisions before the earth ever came into existence. 

{{% scripture p="Revelation 13:5-10 (ESV)" %}} 

**5** And the beast was given a mouth uttering haughty and blasphemous words, and it was allowed to exercise authority for forty-two months. **6** It opened its mouth to utter blasphemies against God, blaspheming his name and his dwelling, that is, those who dwell in heaven. **7** Also it was allowed to make war on the saints and to conquer them. And authority was given it over every tribe and people and language and nation, **8** and all who dwell on earth will worship it, everyone whose name has not been written before the foundation of the world in the book of life of the Lamb who was slain. **9** If anyone has an ear, let him hear: **10** If anyone is to be taken captive, to captivity he goes, if anyone is to be slain with the sword, with the sword must he be slain. Here is a call for the endurance and faith of the saints.                           

{{% /scripture %}} 

We should never view martyrdom as some unfortunate doom the Lord has allowed to come our way. On the contrary, it is an honor to leave this life in such a manner because it is one of the greatest tests a believer will ever have to undergo. One could say it is a compliment for the spiritual maturity one has attained in this life. But how this departure can occur is what makes facing it so challenging. There is no question that it is not for the faint of heart or those of weaker faith. But no believer should ever assume it won’t happen to them as if they are somehow exempt! As we already know, our future in this present world is not something we can predict. The Lord knows the strength of our faith better than we do so that whatever He puts us through is something we can handle whether we believe that or not. Better to trust in Him knowing that He has every idea of what He is doing. We must never overestimate our commitment (as Peter did **Matthew 26:35**), nor should we ever make it our business to downplay our capabilities and strengths. The safest option is to leave the evaluation process up to God and ensure we are growing as He wants us to. 

Yes, the manner in which the beast’s followers may execute the most faithful may be unbelievably gruesome and beyond comprehension. The world at that time will very likely employ some of the cruelest torture and execution methods to get as many believers to renounce their faith (something not uncommon during past periods of church history). The Bible does not shy away from giving us examples. 

{{% scripture p="Hebrews 11:35-38 (NASB)" %}} 

**35** Women received *back* their dead by resurrection; and others were tortured, not accepting their release, so that they might obtain a better resurrection; **36** and others experienced mocking and flogging, and further, chains and imprisonment. **37** They were stoned, they were sawn in two, they were tempted, they were put to death with the sword; they went about in sheepskins, in goatskins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented **38** (*people* of whom the world was not worthy), wandering in deserts, *on* mountains, and *sheltering in* caves and holes in the ground.                                                                     

{{% /scripture %}} 

But the manner of death is never something we should ever worry over. Instead, like Steven (**Acts 7:55-60**), who suffered stoning, we should set our eyes on the life that will be ours the moment we breathe our last. And by doing this, we (most importantly) focus our attention on the One who waits to receive us on the other side. As we exit this life physically, we enter into a new one spiritually as our Savior brings us into the eternal reality He made possible by His death on the cross. So if we find ourselves imprisoned or undergoing torture (no matter how gruesome), let’s remember that there is a higher power than that which holds us captive. He understands our pain and suffering and sympathizes with our weaknesses (**Hebrews 4:15**) because He, too, endured much pain, suffering, and torture at the hands of sinners. No amount of human suffering can and will ever be able to compare to all the combined difficulties that our Savior had to put up with during His stay on earth. We often limit Jesus’s suffering to the moments before and during His death on the cross (even if that part of His life was the most difficult time He had ever faced). However, they extend much further back when we remember that our Lord had to live a perfect sin-free life for all the years of His time on earth. That meant that He had to resist all the temptations that came His way, however often they arose. 

We compare our Lord’s perfection to our inability to make it through one day without sinning. That tells us a lot. And although there have been people throughout history who have endured more gruesome physical deaths than Jesus, none of them had to shoulder the spiritual pain of bearing all the sins of all time. Our Lord’s sacrificial suffering was unique and will always be without equal. So if there is someone who understands us like no other, it is most certainly our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ. He suffered and died for us so that He expects us to do the same if and when He calls us to lay our lives down for Him. The more you love a person, the more you want to please them in all that you do. 

{{% scripture p="Matthew 10:28 (NIV)" %}} 

**28** Do not be afraid of those who kill the body but cannot kill the soul. Rather, be afraid of the One who can destroy both soul and body in hell.                      

{{% /scripture %}} 

The Lord will bestow great honor to the one who bears up under the ultimate test of faith when they demonstrate the greatest act of love before Him. So the one who faces torture and death needs to realize the reality of the situation that confronts them at the moment. Their act of giving up their lives for Jesus Christ is of such quality because it is the greatest demonstration of their love for Jesus Christ and their fellow brothers and sisters. Then, when it is all said and done, they can confidently say that they took up their cross and followed their Master faithfully to the end. Despite all the obstacles, nothing should get in the way of our love for the One who loved us beyond comprehension. And it is these types of moments that empower us to resonate with David’s words like never before; that God is our rock and fortress, a shelter in the time of need. Our salvation is in His hands, and no man can ever take that away from us as long as we cling to it until the very end, something God will empower us to do if we genuinely wish to do so. 

{{% scripture p="Psalm 18:1b-2 (NIV)" %}} 

**1** I love you, Lord, my strength. **2** The Lord is my rock, my fortress and my deliverer; my God is my rock, in whom I take refuge, my shield and the horn of my salvation, my stronghold.                             

{{% /scripture %}} 

{{% scripture p="Romans 8:31-39 (NLT)" %}} 

**31** What shall we say about such wonderful things as these? If God is for us, who can ever be against us? **32** Since he did not spare even his own Son but gave him up for us all, won’t he also give us everything else? **33** Who dares accuse us whom God has chosen for his own? No one—for God himself has given us right standing with himself. **34** Who then will condemn us? No one—for Christ Jesus died for us and was raised to life for us, and he is sitting in the place of honor at God’s right hand, pleading for us. **35** Can anything ever separate us from Christ’s love? Does it mean he no longer loves us if we have trouble or calamity, or are persecuted, or hungry, or destitute, or in danger, or threatened with death? **36** (As the Scriptures say, “For your sake we are killed every day; we are being slaughtered like sheep.”) **37** No, despite all these things, overwhelming victory is ours through Christ, who loved us. **38** And I am convinced that nothing can ever separate us from God’s love. Neither death nor life, neither angels nor demons, neither our fears for today nor our worries about tomorrow—not even the powers of hell can separate us from God’s love. **39** No power in the sky above or in the earth below—indeed, nothing in all creation will ever be able to separate us from the love of God that is revealed in Christ Jesus our Lord.                                                            

{{% /scripture %}} 







### **6. Living Peaceful Lives as Believers**      

living-peaceful-lives-as-believers

{{% scripture p="Romans 12:16-21 (ESV)" %}} 

  **16** Live in harmony with one another. Do not be haughty, but associate with the lowly. Never be wise in your own sight. **17** Repay no one evil for evil, but give thought to do what is honorable in the sight of all. **18** If possible, so far as it depends on you, live peaceably with all. **19** Beloved, never avenge yourselves, but leave it to the wrath of God, for it is written, “Vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord.” **20** To the contrary, “if your enemy is hungry, feed him; if he is thirsty, give him something to drink; for by so doing you will heap burning coals on his head.” **21** Do not be overcome by evil, but overcome evil with good.                              

{{% /scripture %}} 

This comment will address the extreme importance for the believer to mind their own business and live their lives according to God’s will. We have already discussed how believers should orient themselves toward politics and the dangers of involving themselves therein. This topic isn’t much different because we should do our best to stay away from worldly affairs when it is not a good idea to get involved.              

To address our passage, we should already know that it is not our place as believers to take revenge on those who have hurt us or others. We are not God, and His ways are not ours. Jesus is the ultimate judge and authority over this earth, and all that occurs therein (**John 5:22; 1 Corinthians 4:5**). Plus, we should never have any desire to hurt these people back. If they are believers who have wronged us, reconciliation should naturally occur, assuming they are spiritually mature. Believers must live in harmony with one another as family members in Christ. So it is despicable for the church to handle matters in the same manner the world does. 1 Corinthians chapter 6 is an excellent reminder of how we are to go about these things. We are not the world but have come out of it (**John 15:19**), so we should no longer be doing things their way. So what kind of testimony do we give when we don’t show ourselves to be different? Church matters are church matters, while worldly ones bring their own procedures. There is much in this world that does not apply to the body of Christ in specific areas and ways. Unbelievers will naturally tell us to handle things differently than what we know from Scripture. But God’s Word is our guide and should determine how we proceed with specific issues. Paul addresses this topic in 1 Corinthians because that congregation was doing the opposite. They were throwing off God’s authority by assuming it for themselves through pride and arrogance. They did not go to the Lord first but chose to take matters into their own hands. The issue will always be, “*What would the Lord have us do*?” 

So if there is disunity in the church, there are proper procedures for handling those situations. The unity and peace within Christ’s body should not suffer just because of things like these. If troublemakers refuse to repent, they must be expelled. But that should be the very last option and not the first course of action. The church needs to take pains to keep these issues on a spiritual level. Spiritual matters are spiritual matters and should be treated as such whenever the world’s ways do not apply. We are NOT the world! And this principle still applies even when confronted with unbelievers who have wronged us. 

But is it unbiblical to sue an unbeliever or take them to court? It should be the last option, but that is an area of application and isn’t sinful if there are good reasons. The justice system exists for a reason so that society can function as it should. Our Lord does not call those in positions of power “servants” for no reason. Yes, they may not be so in the way believers are through faith, but they maintain justice. No, they don’t do this perfectly, and most if not all of the world’s governments are corrupt. But all must still submit to their authority as long as they do not demand anything that goes against what the Bible tells us to do. 

{{% scripture p="Romans 13:1-7 (ESV)" %}} 

Let every person be subject to the governing authorities. For there is no authority except from God, and those that exist have been instituted by God. **2** Therefore whoever resists the authorities resists what God has appointed, and those who resist will incur judgment. **3** For rulers are not a terror to good conduct, but to bad. Would you have no fear of the one who is in authority? Then do what is good, and you will receive his approval, **4** for he is God's servant for your good. But if you do wrong, be afraid, for he does not bear the sword in vain. For he is the servant of God, an avenger who carries out God's wrath on the wrongdoer. **5** Therefore one must be in subjection, not only to avoid God's wrath but also for the sake of conscience. **6** For because of this you also pay taxes, for the authorities are ministers of God, attending to this very thing. **7** Pay to all what is owed to them: taxes to whom taxes are owed, revenue to whom revenue is owed, respect to whom respect is owed, honor to whom honor is owed.                                             

{{% /scripture %}} 

And, of course, Christ’s sermon on the mount is filled with teachings on how to treat our enemies and those who slander and persecute us. The injunction for us is to love everybody. This is what is means to live peacefully with all men. 

{{% scripture p="Matthew 5:38-42 (NIV)" %}} 

**38** “You have heard that it was said, ‘Eye for eye, and tooth for tooth.’ **39** But I tell you, do not resist an evil person. If anyone slaps you on the right cheek, turn to them the other cheek also. **40** And if anyone wants to sue you and take your shirt, hand over your coat as well. **41** If anyone forces you to go one mile, go with them two miles. **42** Give to the one who asks you, and do not turn away from the one who wants to borrow from you.                                                       

{{% /scripture %}} 

{{% scripture p="Matthew 5:43-47 (NIV)" %}} 

**43** “You have heard that it was said, ‘Love your neighbor and hate your enemy.’ **44** But I tell you, love your enemies and pray for those who persecute you, **45** that you may be children of your Father in heaven. He causes his sun to rise on the evil and the good, and sends rain on the righteous and the unrighteous. **46** If you love those who love you, what reward will you get? Are not even the tax collectors doing that? **47** And if you greet only your own people, what are you doing more than others? Do not even pagans do that?                                             

{{% /scripture %}} 

Now that we have mentioned everything above, we will examine another critical passage that discusses the same issue we have briefly examined. 

{{% scripture p="1 Thessalonians 4:9-12 (ESV)" %}} 

**9** Now concerning brotherly love you have no need for anyone to write to you, for you yourselves have been taught by God to love one another, **10** for that indeed is what you are doing to all the brothers throughout Macedonia. But we urge you, brothers, to do this more and more, **11** and to aspire to live quietly, and to mind your own affairs, and to work with your hands, as we instructed you, **12** so that you may walk properly before outsiders and be dependent on no one.                         

{{% /scripture %}} 

It is not anyone else’s right to stick their nose into other people’s business and assume they know what is best for them by dogmatically stating they need to take this or that or approach, etc. Believers need to sharpen, encourage, and strengthen one another, but not in a legalistic, presumptuous, and judgmental way. We do not need to go snooping around getting involved in other people’s affairs. 

 1 Thessalonians 4:9-12 affirms our “visitor” status here on earth by encouraging us to live as if that truly is the case. We are not to get in other people’s business, especially when we have our own areas we need to work and improve on. The more time we spend focusing on others, the less any given person will have to progress themselves. And this principle is a general one that applies to all other areas of life. We are not here to live comfortably and enjoy ourselves (though we can still enjoy many things). Instead, our goal is to serve the Lord as much as possible. The more “salty” we are for the Lord, the less concern we will have for less important matters because we know our place in this world. 

If we want to be the best witnesses to the world, we need to ensure that the “light” of our faith continues to grow brighter day by day. But if we waste our time on other matters that won’t make any difference, we really begin to appear more similar to the world than we may wish to believe. There are many possibilities and examples, so we could never hope to create a comprehensive list. Politics are one example. And making it our business to go forcing the truth (or even our opinions) on other people is not the biblical approach we should ever take. And, of course, we are not here to make heaven on earth because that isn’t going to happen. We know that the world and most people are only going to worsen, and the church could have prevented at least some of that if they had made the right things the priority. True, the world would still probably be a wicked place (the Millennium will be a prime example of that). But the number of unbelievers, apostates and spiritually immature believers could be lower if there was more unity in the body. 

The point is that believers need to stay out of worldly affairs they have no business engaging in (whether those are personal or general matters collectively). You may ask, “*Ok, so what activities and habits do I need to throw out*?” Time and spiritual growth will reveal these answers. There is no need to overcomplicate this. The answer to all those who wish to know the Lord’s will for their life is to press toward the mark of the upward calling of God (**Philippians 3:14**). But some things are a waste of time. The more we try to involve ourselves in the world (however that may appear), the less we will address the issues that need attention. At the very least, the question is not always what we engage in (assuming perhaps the Lord wants us involved in the first place) but how we do so. So there are some areas of application that need to be considered whatever they may be. 

 It is good to think things through while relying on the Spirit for guidance. But, sooner or later, there will come a time when it will be time to start doing and less thinking. There are many things God does not intend for us to know: to grow and test our faith. If we knew everything ahead of time, living the Christian life would be easy, and our faith would hardly advance. Realistically, it is a waste of time to argue about details and to go in circles over this subject. Knowledge and wisdom will only come to those who start stepping up the steps instead of just staring up at them habitually. There will be mistakes along the way because we all will have our moments when we engage in pointless activities and behaviors that are nothing but a waste of time. We will learn through suffering and failure. But clarity and understanding will come to those who keep going instead of stopping part way.

Do you want to know how the Lord wants you to use your time? Get in the Word, understand it, believe it, and apply it. Only through this process, along with prayer and good solid teaching from a trusted source, can we fulfill the mandate of love God has called us to. In other words, ACTUALLY LIVING the Christian life will have the most significant impact on this world than anything else. More people will begin to see the difference in our conduct and the godly love displayed through it (which will have an impact to some degree). We contrast that to so many of the false and counterfeit ideas of what love looks like in the church today and we can see why so many unbelievers are unimpressed. It is unacceptable to claim Christ but not act much differently than those who need to see Christ manifested before their eyes. Believers need to be different, something only possible by ensuring the safety of their faith by keeping it attuned to God’s Word. But the less we heed and obey it, the less it will transform us. 

On the other hand, it is also true that tickling people's ears by watering down the truth and telling them what they want to hear may cause more individuals to engage in this bandwagon effect. So it is equally true that promising people a fun and easy life without telling them to count the cost will cause many to want to get saved. If we want to witness to people, we need to make sure we do it biblically. Failing to do so will only instill marginal zeal in people’s hearts. That doesn’t mean they can’t or won’t become serious believers, but setting a poor foundation for them certainly doesn’t help. It is not enough to get saved and bathe in the justified status. We must move forward and progress. 

Finally, 1 Thessalonians 4:11-12 states that we should do our best not to be a burden to other people. It is true that even if “the worker is due his wages,” it is never the right of anyone (regardless of their spiritual gift(s)) to pressure and force people to lend them a helping hand. Assuming the need is serious enough, any brother or sister should have no problem giving if they are attuned to the Spirit. But the first option for any believer is to do their best to support and sustain themselves to the best of their ability. It is not good to be lazy and expect everyone to give.  If possible, the better alternative is for the believer to sustain themselves if they cannot receive what they need elsewhere. That is why our passage states, “*and to work with your hands*.” However, some believers may not have this option and will require help. If this involves a situation out of their control, the church needs to step in. But even if the case is not an emergency, the Bible encourages us to help our brothers and sisters. 

{{% scripture p="1 John 3:17 (NIV)" %}} 

**17** If anyone has material possessions and sees a brother or sister in need but has no pity on them, how can the love of God be in that person?                                 

{{% /scripture %}} 

And the church is obligated to support their pastor-teacher and its missionaries. They work for and give the truth to their congregation, so it is only fair that the assembly gives back so that their pastor and missionaries may continue supplying the spiritual food and witnessing to others. But again, Paul clarifies that even pastor-teachers and evangelists should not force this issue. Instead, it is better to encourage the body to help out so that they will naturally want to give under the Spirit’s prodding (**1 Corinthians 9:7-18**). It is always dangerous to compel people to give, something Paul warns against (**2 Corinthians 9:6-15**). 



### **7. Coping with Depression- Psalm 34:17-19** 

coping-with-depression-psalm-34-17-to-19

{{% scripture p="Psalm 34:17-19 (NIV)" %}} 

**17** The righteous cry out, and the Lord hears them; he delivers them from all their troubles. **18** The Lord is close to the brokenhearted and saves those who are crushed in spirit. **19** The righteous person may have many troubles, but the Lord delivers him from them all;                                          

{{% /scripture %}} 

This writer does not have a favorite Bible verse and is not a fan of highlighting specific Scripture passages with a marker. There is nothing wrong with those things as long as we keep in mind that all of God’s Word is important and fits together like building blocks. Some people may resonate more with one passage and others with another. But in the end, we need all of Scripture to help us understand the truth. However, some verses stick out to us so much that we find them incredibly encouraging. In this case, I have found Psalm 34:17-19 to be especially helpful when undergoing difficult times. 

 As explained in "**Christian Liberty-Believers and Legalism**,” mental illness is a reality that many Christians can and do suffer with. Depression is one of those things that many of us have gone through. But even though our mental health may not be its best one moment does not automatically mean there is a chronic issue. Of course, some individuals have serious enough problems that require medical attention if they are severe enough. Whatever the case may be, all believers can still find peace and joy in their lives no matter the circumstances. It is true that the Lord may allow some people to have to cope with a “thorn in their flesh” for the rest of their lives. But we should not take that to mean that those conditions deprive the sufferers of their spiritual benefits as believers in Jesus Christ (**Galatians 5:22-23; 2 Timothy 1:7**). Yes, anxiety, depression (whether chronic or short-term), bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, and the like make coping with life more difficult (assuming one has these things). But blessed is the man who does great things despite their struggles! So all the challenges of life make the Christian life all the more rewarding for those who bear up under those crucibles. This life won’t last forever and will end far better than the beginning when all truly committed believers receive their new resurrection bodies. We need to think about the future hope that awaits us. Our lives are not that long and will soon be over. 

{{% scripture p="Hebrews 10:35-39" %}} 

**35** So do not throw away your confidence; it will be richly rewarded. **36** You need to persevere so that when you have done the will of God, you will receive what he has promised. **37** For, “In just a little while, he who is coming will come and will not delay.”  **38** And, “But my righteous one will live by faith. And I take no pleasure in the one who shrinks back.”  **39** But we do not belong to those who shrink back and are destroyed, but to those who have faith and are saved.                                                      

{{% /scripture %}} 

It is safe to say that all believers have down periods where they feel low or “in the dumps.” Some have experienced mild sadness, while others have gone through more extreme cases that tested their faith like never before. It is not wrong to be sad and depressed as long as we strive to give our best for the Lord during our strenuous “bouts.” We need to remember that the Lord is not angry at us for experiencing sadness and grief (many of the great believers in the Bible had their times and moments). It is ok to cry, and there is no shame in that. Sometimes, tears help us to get the pain out. The fact is that hard times can be our blessings in disguise (think of Laura Story’s song- “Blessings”) meant to help us remember that the Lord is our only true hope, security, and happiness.  So when we see our sadness and suffering through this lens, we can be all the more joyful knowing our best friend and greatest advocate is holding us by the hand, guiding our every step as we grow closer with Him day by day. Fear of the Lord means loving Him through obedience. It doesn’t mean we are so scared of God that we can barely move forward because our faith is paralyzed by fear. That is not the meaning of **Philippians 2:12**. It means to live with all due reverence and respect to our Lord and Master. It means we are aware of the rewards of obedience and the consequences for disobedience. And because of these facts, we realize that only God has the power to condemn us (**Matthew 10:28**). A healthy fear of the Lord entails total commitment to Christ, knowing that our eternal future is in His hands and no one else’s. But this fear should never cause us to stumble in any way. We are not walking on a tightrope where one sin ruins everything. The Bible emphasizes grace for a reason! But we also keep in mind that continuous disobedience can threaten our relationship with Jesus and even our eternal life. But we have nothing to fear as long as we continue to grow spiritually. 

Perhaps it is the case that we find ourselves depressed to whatever level and for whatever reason. If we are depressed or mentally anguished because of habitual disobedience and going astray, then that is a good thing meant to help bring us back. But even mature, growing believers can suffer varying levels of sadness due to various reasons and circumstances not necessarily involving sin. There may not be an overnight fix for more difficult cases, but there is always a way out to enjoy the life the Lord intends us to live. Obedience brings peace and joy because it is always better to suffer for doing what is right instead of what is wrong (**1 Peter 2:20**). But that doesn’t mean advancing Christians are immune to depression. We all go through difficult times! And even though some cases are worse than others, the Lord’s ability to help never changes! Psalm 34:17-19 teaches a general principle that anyone who needs help from Him will receive it. And just because we may feel that our symptoms have lingered for longer than we may have anticipated does not mean God is not working on and helping our case. If we continue to cry to Him for help, we must believe that He can and WILL aid us no matter how ugly and terrifying things may seem to be at the moment. There is no unique person who is suffering something that no one else hasn’t already endured. And it is equally valid that just as soon as we think we have it harder than anyone else, there is someone around the corner currently in a much more difficult situation. We need to remember that we are not alone in our agony and that many of our brothers and sisters have and are coping with their own difficulties. We are in the same boat because we are never alone! All believers who are part of Christ’s body suffer when one person suffers (**1 Corinthians 12:26**). 1 Peter 5:8-9 clarifies this when it tells us, “*Be alert and of sober mind. Your enemy the devil prowls around like a roaring lion looking for someone to devour.* ***9** Resist him, standing firm in the faith, **because you know that the family of believers throughout the world is undergoing the same kind of sufferings***. 

And let us not forget the persecuted/underground church (**Hebrews 13:3**)! Some of the greatest believers have undergone the most intense suffering imaginable. However, we must never use this as an argument to state that any believer not suffering the persecution they endure has it “easy.” There are various types of testing with different levels of difficulty. Just because some aren’t suffering torture or beatings in prison does not make their trials (especially those in free countries) unimportant to God. The Lord cares about all of His children and understands the pain involved with giving our very best for Him. And He is the One who understands how much we can take because He tests us by allowing us to face whatever He brings our way (**1 Corinthians 10:13**). So it is His best will for us to endure whatever we must to please Him the most. 

No one who cries out to God for help will be refused! That doesn’t mean the Lord will spare us from any pain or even martyrdom! We will endure much pain and suffering. But it does mean that He will sustain our faith through the challenges we may face now and in the future. If we choose to trust in Him, He will ensure that we make it safely to His heavenly kingdom to receive a great reward for a life well-lived in His service. Satan and our flesh may attempt to get us to turn back and give up, but our Savior will deliver us from such thoughts if we trust Him. 

{{% scripture p="2 Timothy 4:18 (NIV)" %}} 

**18** The Lord will rescue me from every evil attack and will bring me safely to his heavenly kingdom. To him be glory for ever and ever. Amen.                            

{{% /scripture %}} 

And not only will the Lord ensure our eternal security as we continue in our faith, but He will turn our fears, sorrows, and anguish into peace and joy if we allow Him. We just have to be willing to walk in His Spirit and trust in every promise that He has given us in His Word. If we keep our eyes fixed on the prize and remember our true identity and purpose in life, we have no reason to fear. We can resonate well with our Lord’s words to His disciples in Luke 10:21 when He says, “*rejoice that your names are written in heaven*.” We believers have every reason to be happy because we have eternal life now and all the present gifts and realities of the indwelling Spirit. He Himself is the greatest gift (along with the sacrifice it took to grant it) we can ever hope for and all the strength we need to complete the mission given us. Nothing in this world compares to Jesus Christ! He should be more costly to us than even the most prized and esteemed things of the world. 

Even though we may feel lost and hopeless, the Lord is never far away. As our verse says, “*He is near to the broken hearted, and saves those who are crushed in spirit*.” Feelings and emotions are something we all experience. But they do not always tell the truth! And they do not have to determine how we feel and act. Just because we feel abandoned does not mean we are! If we truly believe God’s Word, we know this will NEVER be the case! Our quality of life all depends on how well we respond to Christ and allow His truth to transform our lives. We live by faith according to His promises. We do not walk based on feelings or emotions but by the Spirit who makes the truth real and usable to us. And the Spirit gives us nothing but truth and comfort. Wherever He is, freedom always reigns (**2 Corinthians 3:17**). 

 

 