content/small-topical/believers-and-politics.md, before:

---
title: Believers and Politics
---

Should believers involve themselves in political democracy? Are some Christians called to channel their spiritual gifts through politics?

## Introduction

Political involvement is not the best idea. The question is not whether it is right or wrong, but is it something the Lord wants us to spend our time doing? Watching the news is alright as long as it doesn’t distract us from our relationship with Jesus Christ. All things in moderation. But political participation is a different story than casually keeping up with what is going on in the world, isn't it? 

{{% note  %}} 

Although I am highly skeptical God calls any believer to channel their spiritual gifts and ministries through politics, I am not dogmatic. It is possible that a small few may be called upon to do so. But what we can say with certainty is that **most** believers would do well to stay out of politics.  

{{%/ note  %}} 

## What does the Bible say? What should our goal be?

There is no verse that encourages believers to involve themselves in such secular affairs as politics. Instead, Scripture commands us to submit to the government, pay taxes, pray for our leaders (**1 Timothy 2:1-2**), and obey the king (**Romans 13:1-7; 1 Peter 2:13-27**). Military service is also a good thing to do but not required. It is fine and good for believers to give back to their country in some positive ways. 

Our goal as believers is to advance the kingdom through our spiritual service to Christ (**Matthew 28:19-20**). Those things are what Christians should focus on at all times. It is not our job to create heaven on earth (nor could we, even if we all put our maximum effort into it). Our task is not to “*make the world a better place*” because that will never happen. Society will only continue getting worse before and during the tribulation, just before Christ’s second advent. During our Lord’s first advent, the Jews expected a conquering Messiah to liberate them from the Romans through political action. Not only did Jesus not come for that purpose, but He discouraged it because following Christ entails suffering and service, not democracy and political victory.

## The fundamental futility of political involvement

Political involvement is very dangerous in that it does believers little good. Not only will it not somehow prevent the negative “trends” we see today from worsening, but it takes our minds off of the true goal of advancing for Jesus Christ. It is an incredible waste of time and puts our attention on everything but that which actually needs doing. Our work here on Earth involves using what we have received from Christ in spiritual service, not taking matters into our own hands by trying to foolishly accomplish only something that God can do. As believers, we are to let our light shine before men (**Matthew 5:15-16**), but in a way that honors God and demonstrates faith and trust in Him. Political involvement does not accomplish this but sends the wrong message.

The Bible does not command us to vote, campaign, or run for office. There is nothing wrong with voting or not voting. But it is false to believe that the world will get better and stay good if we somehow vote for and elect the right people. As Dr. Luginbill of [Ichthys.com](https://ichthys.com) states:

{{% quote text="Ichthys" src="https://ichthys.com/mail-eschatology-issues84.htm#:~:text=In%20Christ%2C-,response%20%2322%3A,-On%20the%20first" %}}

 God blesses a nation based upon the quality of its remnant. So the best thing we can do as believers who love our country is to be determined to be the "saltiest salt" we can possibly be. But if instead we waste our efforts on politics, we will get less salty -- it's inevitable -- and to that degree, so will our country.

 {{% /quote %}}

## The coming tribulation makes politics an even worse idea

The tribulation is near, and we know from Scripture that one-third of believers alive during that time will fall away from the faith to follow the antichrist and take his mark (**Revelation 12:4, Daniel 8:10, Matthew 24:10-13, 2 Thessalonians 2:3**). The beast will attempt to unify everyone by installing a system that “works for everybody” and caters to all people all across the political spectrum. He will become the leading political leader of the world, claiming to be Jesus Christ at His second advent.

Christians who involve themselves in politics now and especially during that time are choosing to endanger themselves, given the great deception that is to come. The church must prepare *spiritually* to endure through the tribulation, not through man-made solutions. Political involvement is counterproductive to all of this and runs the risk of great spiritual harm. As believers, our war is spiritual, not political. Those who wish to pursue "victory through democracy" risk compromising their faith by getting sucked into the beast’s political system. Those who try to attempt to fight him by counteracting his plans will not only fail but will more likely crumble under pressure and take the mark. Only God can defeat Satan and his son antichrist; believers cannot accomplish this through politics. Many faithful believers during the tribulation will face persecution, imprisonment, and martyrdom. All of these things are according to God’s Will -- His plans for their lives are meant to glorify Him, witness to the world, test their faith, and increase their eternal rewards.

{{% scripture p="Revelation 13:5-10 (ESV)" %}} 

**5** And the beast was given a mouth uttering haughty and blasphemous words, and it was allowed to exercise authority for forty-two months. **6** It opened its mouth to utter blasphemies against God, blaspheming his name and his dwelling, that is, those who dwell in heaven. **7** Also it was allowed to make war on the saints and to conquer them. And authority was given it over every tribe and people and language and nation, **8** and all who dwell on earth will worship it, everyone whose name has not been written before the foundation of the world in the book of life of the Lamb who was slain. **9** If anyone has an ear, let him hear: **10** **If anyone is to be taken captive, to captivity he goes; if anyone is to be slain with the sword, with the sword must he be slain.** Here is a call for the endurance and faith of the saints.                      

{{% /scripture %}} 

{{% scripture p="Luke 22:42b (ESV)" %}} 

 “Father, if you are willing, remove this cup from me. Nevertheless, **not my will, but yours, be done**.”                                                        

{{% /scripture %}}

Commit message:

Believers and politics- topic description

content/small-topical/believers-and-politics.md, after:

---
title: Believers and Politics
summary:
   Should Christians involve themselves in politics? This brief work argues for why believers should avoid them at all costs. 
---

Should believers involve themselves in political democracy? Are some Christians called to channel their spiritual gifts through politics?

## Introduction

Political involvement is not the best idea. The question is not whether it is right or wrong, but is it something the Lord wants us to spend our time doing? Watching the news is alright as long as it doesn’t distract us from our relationship with Jesus Christ. All things in moderation. But political participation is a different story than casually keeping up with what is going on in the world, isn't it? 

{{% note  %}} 

Although I am highly skeptical God calls any believer to channel their spiritual gifts and ministries through politics, I am not dogmatic. It is possible that a small few may be called upon to do so. But what we can say with certainty is that **most** believers would do well to stay out of politics.  

{{%/ note  %}} 

## What does the Bible say? What should our goal be?

There is no verse that encourages believers to involve themselves in such secular affairs as politics. Instead, Scripture commands us to submit to the government, pay taxes, pray for our leaders (**1 Timothy 2:1-2**), and obey the king (**Romans 13:1-7; 1 Peter 2:13-27**). Military service is also a good thing to do but not required. It is fine and good for believers to give back to their country in some positive ways. 

Our goal as believers is to advance the kingdom through our spiritual service to Christ (**Matthew 28:19-20**). Those things are what Christians should focus on at all times. It is not our job to create heaven on earth (nor could we, even if we all put our maximum effort into it). Our task is not to “*make the world a better place*” because that will never happen. Society will only continue getting worse before and during the tribulation, just before Christ’s second advent. During our Lord’s first advent, the Jews expected a conquering Messiah to liberate them from the Romans through political action. Not only did Jesus not come for that purpose, but He discouraged it because following Christ entails suffering and service, not democracy and political victory.

## The fundamental futility of political involvement

Political involvement is very dangerous in that it does believers little good. Not only will it not somehow prevent the negative “trends” we see today from worsening, but it takes our minds off of the true goal of advancing for Jesus Christ. It is an incredible waste of time and puts our attention on everything but that which actually needs doing. Our work here on Earth involves using what we have received from Christ in spiritual service, not taking matters into our own hands by trying to foolishly accomplish only something that God can do. As believers, we are to let our light shine before men (**Matthew 5:15-16**), but in a way that honors God and demonstrates faith and trust in Him. Political involvement does not accomplish this but sends the wrong message.

The Bible does not command us to vote, campaign, or run for office. There is nothing wrong with voting or not voting. But it is false to believe that the world will get better and stay good if we somehow vote for and elect the right people. As Dr. Luginbill of [Ichthys.com](https://ichthys.com) states:

{{% quote text="Ichthys" src="https://ichthys.com/mail-eschatology-issues84.htm#:~:text=In%20Christ%2C-,response%20%2322%3A,-On%20the%20first" %}}

 God blesses a nation based upon the quality of its remnant. So the best thing we can do as believers who love our country is to be determined to be the "saltiest salt" we can possibly be. But if instead we waste our efforts on politics, we will get less salty -- it's inevitable -- and to that degree, so will our country.

 {{% /quote %}}

## The coming tribulation makes politics an even worse idea

The tribulation is near, and we know from Scripture that one-third of believers alive during that time will fall away from the faith to follow the antichrist and take his mark (**Revelation 12:4, Daniel 8:10, Matthew 24:10-13, 2 Thessalonians 2:3**). The beast will attempt to unify everyone by installing a system that “works for everybody” and caters to all people all across the political spectrum. He will become the leading political leader of the world, claiming to be Jesus Christ at His second advent.

Christians who involve themselves in politics now and especially during that time are choosing to endanger themselves, given the great deception that is to come. The church must prepare *spiritually* to endure through the tribulation, not through man-made solutions. Political involvement is counterproductive to all of this and runs the risk of great spiritual harm. As believers, our war is spiritual, not political. Those who wish to pursue "victory through democracy" risk compromising their faith by getting sucked into the beast’s political system. Those who try to attempt to fight him by counteracting his plans will not only fail but will more likely crumble under pressure and take the mark. Only God can defeat Satan and his son antichrist; believers cannot accomplish this through politics. Many faithful believers during the tribulation will face persecution, imprisonment, and martyrdom. All of these things are according to God’s Will -- His plans for their lives are meant to glorify Him, witness to the world, test their faith, and increase their eternal rewards.

{{% scripture p="Revelation 13:5-10 (ESV)" %}} 

**5** And the beast was given a mouth uttering haughty and blasphemous words, and it was allowed to exercise authority for forty-two months. **6** It opened its mouth to utter blasphemies against God, blaspheming his name and his dwelling, that is, those who dwell in heaven. **7** Also it was allowed to make war on the saints and to conquer them. And authority was given it over every tribe and people and language and nation, **8** and all who dwell on earth will worship it, everyone whose name has not been written before the foundation of the world in the book of life of the Lamb who was slain. **9** If anyone has an ear, let him hear: **10** **If anyone is to be taken captive, to captivity he goes; if anyone is to be slain with the sword, with the sword must he be slain.** Here is a call for the endurance and faith of the saints.                      

{{% /scripture %}} 

{{% scripture p="Luke 22:42b (ESV)" %}} 

 “Father, if you are willing, remove this cup from me. Nevertheless, **not my will, but yours, be done**.”                                                        

{{% /scripture %}}
