content/small-topical/christians-and-suicide.md, before:

---
title: Christians and Suicide
---

It is not improper to ask whether true believers can commit suicide---that is, can completely give up and fail to trust in the Lord by taking their own lives. I would answer yes because King Saul most likely did during his final battle on Mount Gilboa. We’ll take a look at it below.

{{% scripture p="1 Samuel 31:1-6 (NKJV)" %}} 

Now the Philistines fought against Israel; and the men of Israel fled from before the Philistines, and fell slain on Mount Gilboa. **2** Then the Philistines followed hard after Saul and his sons. And the Philistines killed Jonathan, Abinadab, and Malchishua, Saul’s sons. **3** The battle became fierce against Saul. The archers hit him, and he was severely wounded by the archers. **4** Then Saul said to his armorbearer, “Draw your sword, and thrust me through with it, lest these uncircumcised men come and thrust me through and abuse me.” But his armorbearer would not, for he was greatly afraid. Therefore Saul took a sword and fell on it. **5** And when his armorbearer saw that Saul was dead, he also fell on his sword, and died with him. **6** So Saul, his three sons, his armorbearer, and all his men died together that same day.                                                               

{{% /scripture %}} 

Not long before the above happened, Samuel told Saul (predicting his future predicament), “*The Lord will deliver both Israel and you into the hands of the Philistines, and tomorrow you and your sons will be with me. The Lord will also give the army of Israel into the hands of the Philistines*” (**1 Samuel 28:19**). Should we take “you and your sons will be with me” as referring to physical death to awaken to spiritual life with Samuel in Abraham’s bosom? Or does it mean that Saul and his sons will join Samuel in the grave (consisting of dirt), which is the destination for all people’s (both believer and unbeliever) bodies? Did Saul die physically only to end up condemned in hell after committing suicide? The former is most likely the correct translation. We know that Saul’s son Jonathan was saved. Therefore, it is most likely that Saul went where Jonathan went (Abrahams's bosom). However, it is still unclear whether “with me” refers to physical death resulting in spiritual life or physical death leading to spiritual life for all men or just some of them. I take it to mean physical death ending in spiritual life for Saul and all of his sons. I believe we will see all of them in heaven one day. 

Christians can commit suicide. Believers can only lose salvation through unbelief, not suicide. There is no single passage in Scripture that supports the false idea that suicide for believers leads to hell. On the contrary, the Bible tells us that those who die in faith will enter God’s kingdom. Continuous belief in the Lord Jesus Christ is the only condition for a person to enter the kingdom of heaven, as **John 3:16-18** demonstrates. 

But the fact that someone kills themself doesn’t speak very well of their faith and demonstrates just how weak it was. There is no excuse for taking one’s life because that is a sin where we attempt to claim ownership of ourselves by taking matters into our own hands out of distrust that God will work things out. **Note**---This doubt is not the same thing as not believing in Jesus Christ at all. Instead, it is failing to trust that he will grant us the strength and endurance to overcome the present circumstances, something every believer is guilty of because we all have our times of doubt and disbelief. Even the greatest believers in the Bible (Moses and Elijah) stumbled dramatically in how they reacted to their circumstances (**1 Kings 19; Numbers 20:11**). One could argue that those who take their lives were never saved at all. However, this may be true in some cases, but not all. 

We are not our own and belong to the awesome Creator who made us. So for any believer who takes their life, they do so exiting this world with faith intact to enter God’s kingdom but at a very poor spiritual level. But they will still be happy to an unexplainable and unimaginable degree spending eternity with their dear and precious Savior Jesus Christ.

Commit message:

Christians and suicide-topic description

content/small-topical/christians-and-suicide.md, after:

---
title: Christians and Suicide
summary: 
   The following is what I believe on the issue of suicide within the church and whether true believers can commit it. 
---

It is not improper to ask whether true believers can commit suicide---that is, can completely give up and fail to trust in the Lord by taking their own lives. I would answer yes because King Saul most likely did during his final battle on Mount Gilboa. We’ll take a look at it below.

{{% scripture p="1 Samuel 31:1-6 (NKJV)" %}} 

Now the Philistines fought against Israel; and the men of Israel fled from before the Philistines, and fell slain on Mount Gilboa. **2** Then the Philistines followed hard after Saul and his sons. And the Philistines killed Jonathan, Abinadab, and Malchishua, Saul’s sons. **3** The battle became fierce against Saul. The archers hit him, and he was severely wounded by the archers. **4** Then Saul said to his armorbearer, “Draw your sword, and thrust me through with it, lest these uncircumcised men come and thrust me through and abuse me.” But his armorbearer would not, for he was greatly afraid. Therefore Saul took a sword and fell on it. **5** And when his armorbearer saw that Saul was dead, he also fell on his sword, and died with him. **6** So Saul, his three sons, his armorbearer, and all his men died together that same day.                                                               

{{% /scripture %}} 

Not long before the above happened, Samuel told Saul (predicting his future predicament), “*The Lord will deliver both Israel and you into the hands of the Philistines, and tomorrow you and your sons will be with me. The Lord will also give the army of Israel into the hands of the Philistines*” (**1 Samuel 28:19**). Should we take “you and your sons will be with me” as referring to physical death to awaken to spiritual life with Samuel in Abraham’s bosom? Or does it mean that Saul and his sons will join Samuel in the grave (consisting of dirt), which is the destination for all people’s (both believer and unbeliever) bodies? Did Saul die physically only to end up condemned in hell after committing suicide? The former is most likely the correct translation. We know that Saul’s son Jonathan was saved. Therefore, it is most likely that Saul went where Jonathan went (Abrahams's bosom). However, it is still unclear whether “with me” refers to physical death resulting in spiritual life or physical death leading to spiritual life for all men or just some of them. I take it to mean physical death ending in spiritual life for Saul and all of his sons. I believe we will see all of them in heaven one day. 

Christians can commit suicide. Believers can only lose salvation through unbelief, not suicide. There is no single passage in Scripture that supports the false idea that suicide for believers leads to hell. On the contrary, the Bible tells us that those who die in faith will enter God’s kingdom. Continuous belief in the Lord Jesus Christ is the only condition for a person to enter the kingdom of heaven, as **John 3:16-18** demonstrates. 

But the fact that someone kills themself doesn’t speak very well of their faith and demonstrates just how weak it was. There is no excuse for taking one’s life because that is a sin where we attempt to claim ownership of ourselves by taking matters into our own hands out of distrust that God will work things out. **Note**---This doubt is not the same thing as not believing in Jesus Christ at all. Instead, it is failing to trust that he will grant us the strength and endurance to overcome the present circumstances, something every believer is guilty of because we all have our times of doubt and disbelief. Even the greatest believers in the Bible (Moses and Elijah) stumbled dramatically in how they reacted to their circumstances (**1 Kings 19; Numbers 20:11**). One could argue that those who take their lives were never saved at all. However, this may be true in some cases, but not all. 

We are not our own and belong to the awesome Creator who made us. So for any believer who takes their life, they do so exiting this world with faith intact to enter God’s kingdom but at a very poor spiritual level. But they will still be happy to an unexplainable and unimaginable degree spending eternity with their dear and precious Savior Jesus Christ.
