---
title: Coping with Depression - Psalm 34:17-19
---

{{% scripture p="Psalm 34:17-19 (NIV)" %}} 

**17** The righteous cry out, and the Lord hears them; he delivers them from all their troubles. **18** The Lord is close to the brokenhearted and saves those who are crushed in spirit. **19** The righteous person may have many troubles, but the Lord delivers him from them all;                                          

{{% /scripture %}} 

I do not have a favorite Bible verse and is not a fan of highlighting specific Scripture passages with a marker. There is nothing wrong with those things as long as we keep in mind that all of God’s Word is important and fits together like building blocks. Some people may resonate more with one passage and others with another. But in the end, we need all of Scripture to help us understand the truth. However, some verses stick out to us so much that we find them incredibly encouraging. In this case, I have found Psalm 34:17-19 to be especially helpful when undergoing difficult times. 

As explained in "**Christian Liberty-Believers and Legalism**,” (TODO) mental illness is a reality that many Christians can and do suffer with. Depression is one of those things that many of us have gone through. But even though our mental health may not be its best one moment does not automatically mean there is a chronic issue. Of course, some individuals have serious enough problems that require medical attention if they are severe enough. Whatever the case may be, all believers can still find peace and joy in their lives no matter the circumstances. It is true that the Lord may allow some people to have to cope with a “thorn in their flesh” for the rest of their lives. But we should not take that to mean that those conditions deprive the sufferers of their spiritual benefits as believers in Jesus Christ (**Galatians 5:22-23; 2 Timothy 1:7**). Yes, anxiety, depression (whether chronic or short-term), bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, and the like make coping with life more difficult (assuming one has these things). But blessed is the man who does great things despite their struggles! So all the challenges of life make the Christian life all the more rewarding for those who bear up under those crucibles. This life won’t last forever and will end far better than the beginning when all truly committed believers receive their new resurrection bodies. We need to think about the future hope that awaits us. Our lives are not that long and will soon be over. 

{{% scripture p="Hebrews 10:35-39" %}} 

**35** So do not throw away your confidence; it will be richly rewarded. **36** You need to persevere so that when you have done the will of God, you will receive what he has promised. **37** For, “In just a little while, he who is coming will come and will not delay.”  **38** And, “But my righteous one will live by faith. And I take no pleasure in the one who shrinks back.”  **39** But we do not belong to those who shrink back and are destroyed, but to those who have faith and are saved.

{{% /scripture %}} 

It is safe to say that all believers have down periods where they feel low or “in the dumps.” Some have experienced mild sadness, while others have gone through more extreme cases that tested their faith like never before. It is not wrong to be sad and depressed as long as we strive to give our best for the Lord during our strenuous “bouts.” We need to remember that the Lord is not angry at us for experiencing sadness and grief (many of the great believers in the Bible had their times and moments). It is ok to cry, and there is no shame in that. Sometimes, tears help us to get the pain out. The fact is that hard times can be our blessings in disguise (think of Laura Story’s song- “Blessings”) meant to help us remember that the Lord is our only true hope, security, and happiness.  So when we see our sadness and suffering through this lens, we can be all the more joyful knowing our best friend and greatest advocate is holding us by the hand, guiding our every step as we grow closer with Him day by day. Fear of the Lord means loving Him through obedience. It doesn’t mean we are so scared of God that we can barely move forward because our faith is paralyzed by fear. That is not the meaning of **Philippians 2:12**. It means to live with all due reverence and respect to our Lord and Master. It means we are aware of the rewards of obedience and the consequences for disobedience. And because of these facts, we realize that only God has the power to condemn us (**Matthew 10:28**). A healthy fear of the Lord entails total commitment to Christ, knowing that our eternal future is in His hands and no one else’s. But this fear should never cause us to stumble in any way. We are not walking on a tightrope where one sin ruins everything. The Bible emphasizes grace for a reason! But we also keep in mind that continuous disobedience can threaten our relationship with Jesus and even our eternal life. But we have nothing to fear as long as we continue to grow spiritually. 

Perhaps it is the case that we find ourselves depressed to whatever level and for whatever reason. If we are depressed or mentally anguished because of habitual disobedience and going astray, then that is a good thing meant to help bring us back. But even mature, growing believers can suffer varying levels of sadness due to various reasons and circumstances not necessarily involving sin. There may not be an overnight fix for more difficult cases, but there is always a way out to enjoy the life the Lord intends us to live. Obedience brings peace and joy because it is always better to suffer for doing what is right instead of what is wrong (**1 Peter 2:20**). But that doesn’t mean advancing Christians are immune to depression. We all go through difficult times! And even though some cases are worse than others, the Lord’s ability to help never changes! Psalm 34:17-19 teaches a general principle that anyone who needs help from Him will receive it. And just because we may feel that our symptoms have lingered for longer than we may have anticipated does not mean God is not working on and helping our case. If we continue to cry to Him for help, we must believe that He can and WILL aid us no matter how ugly and terrifying things may seem to be at the moment. There is no unique person who is suffering something that no one else hasn’t already endured. And it is equally valid that just as soon as we think we have it harder than anyone else, there is someone around the corner currently in a much more difficult situation. We need to remember that we are not alone in our agony and that many of our brothers and sisters have and are coping with their own difficulties. We are in the same boat because we are never alone! All believers who are part of Christ’s body suffer when one person suffers (**1 Corinthians 12:26**). 1 Peter 5:8-9 clarifies this when it tells us, “*Be alert and of sober mind. Your enemy the devil prowls around like a roaring lion looking for someone to devour.* ***9** Resist him, standing firm in the faith, **because you know that the family of believers throughout the world is undergoing the same kind of sufferings***. 

And let us not forget the persecuted/underground church (**Hebrews 13:3**)! Some of the greatest believers have undergone the most intense suffering imaginable. However, we must never use this as an argument to state that any believer not suffering the persecution they endure has it “easy.” There are various types of testing with different levels of difficulty. Just because some aren’t suffering torture or beatings in prison does not make their trials (especially those in free countries) unimportant to God. The Lord cares about all of His children and understands the pain involved with giving our very best for Him. And He is the One who understands how much we can take because He tests us by allowing us to face whatever He brings our way (**1 Corinthians 10:13**). So it is His best will for us to endure whatever we must to please Him the most. 

No one who cries out to God for help will be refused! That doesn’t mean the Lord will spare us from any pain or even martyrdom! We will endure much pain and suffering. But it does mean that He will sustain our faith through the challenges we may face now and in the future. If we choose to trust in Him, He will ensure that we make it safely to His heavenly kingdom to receive a great reward for a life well-lived in His service. Satan and our flesh may attempt to get us to turn back and give up, but our Savior will deliver us from such thoughts if we trust Him. 

{{% scripture p="2 Timothy 4:18 (NIV)" %}} 

**18** The Lord will rescue me from every evil attack and will bring me safely to his heavenly kingdom. To him be glory for ever and ever. Amen.                            

{{% /scripture %}} 

And not only will the Lord ensure our eternal security as we continue in our faith, but He will turn our fears, sorrows, and anguish into peace and joy if we allow Him. We just have to be willing to walk in His Spirit and trust in every promise that He has given us in His Word. If we keep our eyes fixed on the prize and remember our true identity and purpose in life, we have no reason to fear. We can resonate well with our Lord’s words to His disciples in Luke 10:21 when He says, “*rejoice that your names are written in heaven*.” We believers have every reason to be happy because we have eternal life now and all the present gifts and realities of the indwelling Spirit. He Himself is the greatest gift (along with the sacrifice it took to grant it) we can ever hope for and all the strength we need to complete the mission given us. Nothing in this world compares to Jesus Christ! He should be more costly to us than even the most prized and esteemed things of the world. 

Even though we may feel lost and hopeless, the Lord is never far away. As our verse says, “*He is near to the broken hearted, and saves those who are crushed in spirit*.” Feelings and emotions are something we all experience. But they do not always tell the truth! And they do not have to determine how we feel and act. Just because we feel abandoned does not mean we are! If we truly believe God’s Word, we know this will NEVER be the case! Our quality of life all depends on how well we respond to Christ and allow His truth to transform our lives. We live by faith according to His promises. We do not walk based on feelings or emotions but by the Spirit who makes the truth real and usable to us. And the Spirit gives us nothing but truth and comfort. Wherever He is, freedom always reigns (**2 Corinthians 3:17**). 
