---
title: Living Peaceful Lives as Believers
---

{{% scripture p="Romans 12:16-21 (ESV)" %}} 

**16** Live in harmony with one another. Do not be haughty, but associate with the lowly. Never be wise in your own sight. **17** Repay no one evil for evil, but give thought to do what is honorable in the sight of all. **18** If possible, so far as it depends on you, live peaceably with all. **19** Beloved, never avenge yourselves, but leave it to the wrath of God, for it is written, “Vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord.” **20** To the contrary, “if your enemy is hungry, feed him; if he is thirsty, give him something to drink; for by so doing you will heap burning coals on his head.” **21** Do not be overcome by evil, but overcome evil with good.                              

{{% /scripture %}} 

This comment will address the extreme importance for the believer to mind their own business and live their lives according to God’s will. We have already discussed how believers should orient themselves toward politics and the dangers of involving themselves therein. This topic isn’t much different because we should do our best to stay away from worldly affairs when it is not a good idea to get involved.              

To address our passage, we should already know that it is not our place as believers to take revenge on those who have hurt us or others. We are not God, and His ways are not ours. Jesus is the ultimate judge and authority over this earth, and all that occurs therein (**John 5:22; 1 Corinthians 4:5**). Plus, we should never have any desire to hurt these people back. If they are believers who have wronged us, reconciliation should naturally occur, assuming they are spiritually mature. Believers must live in harmony with one another as family members in Christ. So it is despicable for the church to handle matters in the same manner the world does. 1 Corinthians chapter 6 is an excellent reminder of how we are to go about these things. We are not the world but have come out of it (**John 15:19**), so we should no longer be doing things their way. So what kind of testimony do we give when we don’t show ourselves to be different? Church matters are church matters, while worldly ones bring their own procedures. There is much in this world that does not apply to the body of Christ in specific areas and ways. Unbelievers will naturally tell us to handle things differently than what we know from Scripture. But God’s Word is our guide and should determine how we proceed with specific issues. Paul addresses this topic in 1 Corinthians because that congregation was doing the opposite. They were throwing off God’s authority by assuming it for themselves through pride and arrogance. They did not go to the Lord first but chose to take matters into their own hands. The issue will always be, “*What would the Lord have us do*?” 

So if there is disunity in the church, there are proper procedures for handling those situations. The unity and peace within Christ’s body should not suffer just because of things like these. If troublemakers refuse to repent, they must be expelled. But that should be the very last option and not the first course of action. The church needs to take pains to keep these issues on a spiritual level. Spiritual matters are spiritual matters and should be treated as such whenever the world’s ways do not apply. We are NOT the world! And this principle still applies even when confronted with unbelievers who have wronged us. 

But is it unbiblical to sue an unbeliever or take them to court? It should be the last option, but that is an area of application and isn’t sinful if there are good reasons. The justice system exists for a reason so that society can function as it should. Our Lord does not call those in positions of power “servants” for no reason. Yes, they may not be so in the way believers are through faith, but they maintain justice. No, they don’t do this perfectly, and most if not all of the world’s governments are corrupt. But all must still submit to their authority as long as they do not demand anything that goes against what the Bible tells us to do. 

{{% scripture p="Romans 13:1-7 (ESV)" %}} 

Let every person be subject to the governing authorities. For there is no authority except from God, and those that exist have been instituted by God. **2** Therefore whoever resists the authorities resists what God has appointed, and those who resist will incur judgment. **3** For rulers are not a terror to good conduct, but to bad. Would you have no fear of the one who is in authority? Then do what is good, and you will receive his approval, **4** for he is God's servant for your good. But if you do wrong, be afraid, for he does not bear the sword in vain. For he is the servant of God, an avenger who carries out God's wrath on the wrongdoer. **5** Therefore one must be in subjection, not only to avoid God's wrath but also for the sake of conscience. **6** For because of this you also pay taxes, for the authorities are ministers of God, attending to this very thing. **7** Pay to all what is owed to them: taxes to whom taxes are owed, revenue to whom revenue is owed, respect to whom respect is owed, honor to whom honor is owed.                                             

{{% /scripture %}} 

And, of course, Christ’s sermon on the mount is filled with teachings on how to treat our enemies and those who slander and persecute us. The injunction for us is to love everybody. This is what is means to live peacefully with all men. 

{{% scripture p="Matthew 5:38-42 (NIV)" %}} 

**38** “You have heard that it was said, ‘Eye for eye, and tooth for tooth.’ **39** But I tell you, do not resist an evil person. If anyone slaps you on the right cheek, turn to them the other cheek also. **40** And if anyone wants to sue you and take your shirt, hand over your coat as well. **41** If anyone forces you to go one mile, go with them two miles. **42** Give to the one who asks you, and do not turn away from the one who wants to borrow from you.                                                       

{{% /scripture %}} 

{{% scripture p="Matthew 5:43-47 (NIV)" %}} 

**43** “You have heard that it was said, ‘Love your neighbor and hate your enemy.’ **44** But I tell you, love your enemies and pray for those who persecute you, **45** that you may be children of your Father in heaven. He causes his sun to rise on the evil and the good, and sends rain on the righteous and the unrighteous. **46** If you love those who love you, what reward will you get? Are not even the tax collectors doing that? **47** And if you greet only your own people, what are you doing more than others? Do not even pagans do that?                                             

{{% /scripture %}} 

Now that we have mentioned everything above, we will examine another critical passage that discusses the same issue we have briefly examined. 

{{% scripture p="1 Thessalonians 4:9-12 (ESV)" %}} 

**9** Now concerning brotherly love you have no need for anyone to write to you, for you yourselves have been taught by God to love one another, **10** for that indeed is what you are doing to all the brothers throughout Macedonia. But we urge you, brothers, to do this more and more, **11** and to aspire to live quietly, and to mind your own affairs, and to work with your hands, as we instructed you, **12** so that you may walk properly before outsiders and be dependent on no one.                         

{{% /scripture %}} 

It is not anyone else’s right to stick their nose into other people’s business and assume they know what is best for them by dogmatically stating they need to take this or that or approach, etc. Believers need to sharpen, encourage, and strengthen one another, but not in a legalistic, presumptuous, and judgmental way. We do not need to go snooping around getting involved in other people’s affairs. 

1 Thessalonians 4:9-12 affirms our “visitor” status here on earth by encouraging us to live as if that truly is the case. We are not to get in other people’s business, especially when we have our own areas we need to work and improve on. The more time we spend focusing on others, the less any given person will have to progress themselves. And this principle is a general one that applies to all other areas of life. We are not here to live comfortably and enjoy ourselves (though we can still enjoy many things). Instead, our goal is to serve the Lord as much as possible. The more “salty” we are for the Lord, the less concern we will have for less important matters because we know our place in this world. 

If we want to be the best witnesses to the world, we need to ensure that the “light” of our faith continues to grow brighter day by day. But if we waste our time on other matters that won’t make any difference, we really begin to appear more similar to the world than we may wish to believe. There are many possibilities and examples, so we could never hope to create a comprehensive list. Politics are one example. And making it our business to go forcing the truth (or even our opinions) on other people is not the biblical approach we should ever take. And, of course, we are not here to make heaven on earth because that isn’t going to happen. We know that the world and most people are only going to worsen, and the church could have prevented at least some of that if they had made the right things the priority. True, the world would still probably be a wicked place (the Millennium will be a prime example of that). But the number of unbelievers, apostates and spiritually immature believers could be lower if there was more unity in the body. 

The point is that believers need to stay out of worldly affairs they have no business engaging in (whether those are personal or general matters collectively). You may ask, “*Ok, so what activities and habits do I need to throw out*?” Time and spiritual growth will reveal these answers. There is no need to overcomplicate this. The answer to all those who wish to know the Lord’s will for their life is to press toward the mark of the upward calling of God (**Philippians 3:14**). But some things are a waste of time. The more we try to involve ourselves in the world (however that may appear), the less we will address the issues that need attention. At the very least, the question is not always what we engage in (assuming perhaps the Lord wants us involved in the first place) but how we do so. So there are some areas of application that need to be considered whatever they may be. 

It is good to think things through while relying on the Spirit for guidance. But, sooner or later, there will come a time when it will be time to start doing and less thinking. There are many things God does not intend for us to know: to grow and test our faith. If we knew everything ahead of time, living the Christian life would be easy, and our faith would hardly advance. Realistically, it is a waste of time to argue about details and to go in circles over this subject. Knowledge and wisdom will only come to those who start stepping up the steps instead of just staring up at them habitually. There will be mistakes along the way because we all will have our moments when we engage in pointless activities and behaviors that are nothing but a waste of time. We will learn through suffering and failure. But clarity and understanding will come to those who keep going instead of stopping part way.

Do you want to know how the Lord wants you to use your time? Get in the Word, understand it, believe it, and apply it. Only through this process, along with prayer and good solid teaching from a trusted source, can we fulfill the mandate of love God has called us to. In other words, ACTUALLY LIVING the Christian life will have the most significant impact on this world than anything else. More people will begin to see the difference in our conduct and the godly love displayed through it (which will have an impact to some degree). We contrast that to so many of the false and counterfeit ideas of what love looks like in the church today and we can see why so many unbelievers are unimpressed. It is unacceptable to claim Christ but not act much differently than those who need to see Christ manifested before their eyes. Believers need to be different, something only possible by ensuring the safety of their faith by keeping it attuned to God’s Word. But the less we heed and obey it, the less it will transform us. 

On the other hand, it is also true that tickling people's ears by watering down the truth and telling them what they want to hear may cause more individuals to engage in this bandwagon effect. So it is equally true that promising people a fun and easy life without telling them to count the cost will cause many to want to get saved. If we want to witness to people, we need to make sure we do it biblically. Failing to do so will only instill marginal zeal in people’s hearts. That doesn’t mean they can’t or won’t become serious believers, but setting a poor foundation for them certainly doesn’t help. It is not enough to get saved and bathe in the justified status. We must move forward and progress. 

Finally, 1 Thessalonians 4:11-12 states that we should do our best not to be a burden to other people. It is true that even if “the worker is due his wages,” it is never the right of anyone (regardless of their spiritual gift(s)) to pressure and force people to lend them a helping hand. Assuming the need is serious enough, any brother or sister should have no problem giving if they are attuned to the Spirit. But the first option for any believer is to do their best to support and sustain themselves to the best of their ability. It is not good to be lazy and expect everyone to give.  If possible, the better alternative is for the believer to sustain themselves if they cannot receive what they need elsewhere. That is why our passage states, “*and to work with your hands*.” However, some believers may not have this option and will require help. If this involves a situation out of their control, the church needs to step in. But even if the case is not an emergency, the Bible encourages us to help our brothers and sisters. 

{{% scripture p="1 John 3:17 (NIV)" %}} 

**17** If anyone has material possessions and sees a brother or sister in need but has no pity on them, how can the love of God be in that person?                                 

{{% /scripture %}} 

And the church is obligated to support their pastor-teacher and its missionaries. They work for and give the truth to their congregation, so it is only fair that the assembly gives back so that their pastor and missionaries may continue supplying the spiritual food and witnessing to others. But again, Paul clarifies that even pastor-teachers and evangelists should not force this issue. Instead, it is better to encourage the body to help out so that they will naturally want to give under the Spirit’s prodding (**1 Corinthians 9:7-18**). It is always dangerous to compel people to give, something Paul warns against (**2 Corinthians 9:6-15**). 
