---
title: Mission Trips
summary: 
   The church is big on missions trips. Not a bad thing, but a few things believers need to remember when considering them. 
---

## Introduction

Mission trips are good, but we need to help people grow spiritually, not just bring them to Christ. Far too many churches send their members out to evangelize for a week to a few months only to leave without establishing a teaching ministry for their converts. It is a great thing to win people to the Lord, but that is only the beginning of the Christian journey. After salvation, believers are left on earth to grow, progress, and produce. Everyone needs the tools and resources to do this because this will not occur automatically. Believers need the Word of God to study and learn under a prepared teacher. Additionally, everyone needs fellowship for mutual encouragement. Churches not only need to be planted, but they require a team effort to maintain. 

A good church will support those called to missions. Thankfully, the Lord will never fail to provide a means of income for those who set out to spread the gospel. God will always supply our needs so that any believer, no matter their gift or calling, will always receive what they need to carry out the ministry they have been assigned (**Philippians 4:19**).

### Evangelism and mission work ought to be viewed as solemn responsibilities undertaken only by those God has actually called, and must be taken dead-seriously

Evangelism is a great thing, but not everyone is called to it as their main and primary service to Christ. Considering the variety of gifts and ministries in the church (**1 Corinthians 12:4-11**), no believer should “wing it” and take a stab at something without correctly discerning their spiritual gift(s). Unfortunately, far too many believers don’t know what they want to do in life and decide to take matters into their own hands by jumping into the mission field without consulting the Lord first. This results in people involved in something they should have never pursued. Yes, believers can serve at any time, but mature ministry requires prior spiritual growth and progress. Spiritual growth is the answer to the question, “*what does God want me to do*?”

And suppose a believer has the gift of evangelism specifically. In that case, that will be an ongoing task they will carry out until the Lord decides when their time is up (something He foreknew in eternity past). Thus, mission trips are a good thing. However, short-term endeavors aren’t sustainable unless long-term relationships are established (something Paul and the apostles were famous for). There is also then the issue of leading those converted to a good pastor or teaching ministry where they can advance from that point on (instead of stagnate due to being abandoned). 

Overseas ministry is not a joke and should never be treated as some pleasurable vacation where we can do whatever we want regardless of time or circumstances. We must remember that we represent Christ as His ambassadors, which may require us to adjust our habits and behaviors to some degree. Christian liberty is a wonderful thing, but is not to be mishandled to the spiritual harm of other people (**Romans 14:13-23**). Like Paul, we need to learn to adapt to our environments without compromising the truth, and make it about other people and not ourselves (**1 Corinthians 9:20-22**). We must understand that we will encounter people with different backgrounds, cultures, and customs from our own. With this in mind, we must be wary of ourselves and the type of influence we have on others (**1 Peter 2:12**). After all, God, angels, and our departed brethren are watching us (**Hebrews 12:1**). Everything should be done in moderation. There is work to do. We are there to serve, not be served or cater to ourselves (**Matthew 20:28**). Does this mean we cannot enjoy ourselves to some extent? Absolutely not! But all things must be kept in moderation. 

### Mission trips don't only involve evangelism alone

Another crucial factor we need to remember is that missions trips aren’t just for evangelization purposes. Believers with various gifts (assuming the Lord calls them to long-term service in another country or somewhere else in their own country) can also serve through missions. As we have said earlier, converting people to Christ is the first step, while teaching, encouraging, and strengthening are other critical tasks that need attention (**Acts 14:21-29; Matthew 28:19-20**). Different believers have the gifts of teaching, encouragement, giving, helping, exhortation, and the list goes on. There are so many possibilities! 

Be that as it may, everyone still needs to make sure God wants them to participate in this kind of ministry work before jumping into anything. Many believers will minister right where they are -- in and around their home country -- while others may travel abroad or to a specific location alone. Whatever the case, we know that the harvest is plentiful, but the workers are few (**Matthew 9:35-38**).
