---
title: Psalm 131:2 - Taking Control of a Difficult Situation
---

{{% scripture p="Psalm 139:13-16" %}} 

**2** But I have calmed and quieted myself, I am like a weaned child with its mother; like a weaned child I am content.

{{% /scripture %}} 

Life always presents difficult situations at various times and periods. The world is more stressful than ever before despite technological advancements and scientific progress. The Christian life already offers plenty of challenges that increase the difficulty we must bear every day. The devil tempts us every day; our flesh constantly wars against our spirits (**Galatians 5:17**), and the Lord leads us through various tests meant to strengthen and refine our faith. Of course, we don’t always undergo testing, just as how Satan doesn’t tempt us all the time (he is not omnipresent). But there are other things that the Lord can use to test our obedience to Him; things that can occur anytime, anyplace, and anywhere. 

There is nothing wrong with stress as long as we don’t use it as an opportunity to sin. Difficult situations and circumstances will always arise sooner or later at different times and places (at home, work, etc.). How, when, and where these aggravating times creep up on us is not what matters. Our Psalms passage presents one of the keys to reacting to a challenging situation. Something difficult doesn’t mean we have to sin in responding to it. Maybe someone is annoying us at work, or we find the tasks assigned to us overwhelming and tough to bear. Perhaps it is the case that our good work ethic means that our higher-ups have decided to dump more work on us. Whatever the case may be, we can always bear the challenge by staying calm and reasoning to our minds the truth we have taken pains to learn, understand, and believe. 

There are many dangers of being good Christians at home while spending time with the Lord but not carrying any of that with us and applying it. Many things will irritate, stress, test, agitate and annoy us. There will be people we will come to dislike (even though we love them as we should). Another thing is that the evil one and our flesh will choose the most inconvenient times and places to throw a stumbling block in our way. But we must never negatively react to these things. At these moments of application, the rubber meets the road and demonstrates before God and others just how strong our faith is. 

Satan loves to hammer away at our greatest weaknesses to wear us out and discourage us from any further efforts. But we must never give him or our flesh any opportunities. If we know we are weak in certain areas or that some of our habits weaken our spiritual resolve, we must immediately rid ourselves of them (speaking of bad habits). There comes a time with continued spiritual growth when all believers know how to combat their struggles properly. The issue will no longer be a matter of knowing but of doing. Of course, no sinful behavior ever occurred because we never knew what to do. After all, our Lord never tests or allows us to be tempted above what we can bear (**1 Corinthians 10:13**). We knew the solution but refused to take it. And if our knowledge of spiritual combat and testing are slim, then it is our job to take the initiative and grow up spiritually to ready ourselves for all attacks that will come our way. If we fail to grow spiritually, we fail to implement the solution to all our problems. 

We have already mentioned in another study just how dangerous pride is. But two other spiritual hazards also present a trap to our spiritual advance; fear and anger. For example, let’s say a problematic situation arises, and it forces us to apply what we know or to disregard the truth. Continuous anger is always dangerous because allowing our stress and agitation to override all reason and rationale will cause us to fall into a pattern of constant error. Habitual anger is a choice likened to putting our sinful habits on machine-gun fire because we become less restrained over ourselves. When we allow our wrath to rule us, we open up a floodgate of all kinds of other possibilities that will manifest themselves to the worst possible degree. Anger is like alcohol that makes us lose control of our free will and cause us to make all kinds of poor decisions.

On the other hand, a little anger is not sinful as long as we control and quell it quickly. In essence, losing our tempers to such a degree that it causes us to sin is the same as temporarily rebelling against God and saying, “*I don’t care what I think, say, or do at this point*!” Worse yet, we begin to justify our actions based on the belief that we feel we have been wronged or have every reason to get upset. That may be true, but we never have a right or excuse to sin because of that! 

Whenever anger comes, we must get it under control as quickly as possible. As our Psalms passage says, we must develop a lifestyle of calming our hearts and minds and everything else that attempts to take control of us. We must exercise self-control and allow the spirit to calm and soothe our minds with the truth we have stored in our hearts. Calmly reacting to setbacks, confrontations, difficult circumstances, and situations is the key to combating and defeating sin. We need to remind ourselves that sin is never worth it and that giving in to it will never do us any good. It is always better to suffer for doing what is right than doing what is wrong (**1 Peter 3:17**). We must keep in mind that improper conduct is just what our adversary wants. Therefore, we must ask ourselves, “*Do I really want this*?”

True, righteous anger may require us to take action and do something about an issue within our control that we can solve. In fact, we may need to do something (whatever the circumstance may be). But there will be things we cannot change, nor should we try to if we know this for a fact. Israel made the mistake of grumbling in the desert when things didn’t go their way. They also had a habit of giving into fear when they viewed certain obstacles as too great to overcome through the Lord’s strength. The twelve spies sent by Moses to survey the promised land committed this same mistake which caused them to doubt God’s ability to deliver their enemies into their hands. 

Fear can be just as deadly to our faith because it has a nasty habit of paralyzing our trust in God whenever we face opposition. Constant worry and anxiety will also dominate other areas of our life, including our quiet time with the Lord. Fear discourages and hampers the Christian life! How can we benefit from the truth if we never muster the courage to believe it? What benefits do we derive from prayer and Bible reading if our minds are never focused but constantly occupied with distressing thoughts? It is never possible to walk in the spirit when we don’t focus our minds on the Lord and His Word. That is why Isaiah 26:3 states, “*You will keep in perfect peace, **Whose mind is stayed on you, because he trusts in you***.” If we allow fear to dominate, we permit it to take over lives. 

David was a man whose life was filled with much distress and peril on all sides. It is highly doubtful that any believer today could withstand the great tests that this man of God underwent because the most demanding challenges always confront the most zealous believers (David was one of them). David’s enemies pursued him time after time so that he often felt as if there was never any rest or peace in his life. The reality is what told him otherwise. David combated his troubles with the truth to turn the lie on its head, the only possible way to defeat any opposition. He learned to calm and quiet himself down by thinking about the reality of everything he had to face. He knew God was with him and that He (and not himself) was the source of his strength. That is what it means to calm and quiet ourselves down, a process we can only undertake by putting our complete trust in the Lord. Our fate or destiny lies in God’s hands so that we need not trouble ourselves over people who step out of line or stressful circumstances out of our control. Nothing lasts forever, and the end will always be better than the beginning if we would but continue to cast our burdens on the Lord. David had a habit of encouraging himself in the Lord, but faith and truth were still necessary for that to occur. Without faith, we cannot comfort ourselves no matter how hard we try. But when we trust in the Lord, we believe that He is in control which gives us peace of mind and takes the burden of trying to fix the problem ourselves off our shoulders. But whenever we try to solve a problem by taking matters into our own hands, we are in for a disturbing experience that will see no end until we acknowledge our helplessness before the Lord. 
