---
title: Redeeming the Time - The Danger of Complacency
---

There is perhaps no greater danger among believers today than complacency. How any person spends their free time will tell you a lot about their life’s priorities and how much they love God. But before we elaborate a bit more, let’s be clear that those who spend more time with God don’t necessarily love Him more per se. God calls all believers to different things, which means that some will need to spend more time studying the Word and others less. We must also factor in ministry and personal application of the truth. Anyone can spend all the time they want with the Lord on any given day. But if they aren’t applying the truth they have learned, they only waste their time going through the motions but not living out what they learn (**James 1:22-25**). Technically, we are all hypocrites by nature because we are all sinners who transgress against God every day. But there are unacceptable levels that God will not tolerate. On the other hand, acceptable ones are pleasing to the Lord, such as a believer who is growing and advancing spiritually. People like this will see the results of pursuing God’s work of sanctification as they continue to improve in their application of the truth. 

 In this ministry, we have already mentioned that eternal reward is all about how much one produces in proportion to what they have. Every Christian “has” different work to do with varying periods and preparations needed. What matters is how well each person carries out their specific task. It can be very easy to spend hours praying and studying the Word and look down on those who do it less. Of course, we could ALL be doing more every day. But doing a little daily and slowly working one’s way up is better than trying to do four-plus hours one day but nothing the next. Everyone should do what they can with the time they have. Everyone needs to make sure that they have ample time set aside for prayer, Bible reading/study, and ministry. On top of that, the believer has other, lesser priorities such as family, work, chores, and perhaps diet and exercise. 

{{% scripture p="1 Timothy 4:8-10 (NIV)" %}} 

**8** For physical training is of some value, but godliness has value for all things, holding promise for both the present life and the life to come. **9** This is a trustworthy saying that deserves full acceptance. **10** That is why we labor and strive, because we have put our hope in the living God, who is the Savior of all people, and especially of those who believe.                                                                      

{{% /scripture %}} 

Eating healthy and exercising is a good use of any free time outside of our spiritual priorities. If there is one thing (aside from being rich to God and loving others) worth investing in, it is our physical bodies. Yes, they will decay as they age, but taking care of them through proper diet and physical activity is a godly approach to life. We want to bring glory to the Lord in everything we do, so why not properly manage these physical, temporary shells that house our human spirits? Our bodies belong to the Lord, meaning we should honor Him with them if and when we can. There is nothing wrong with not working out or eating healthy consistently, but sinful behavior can emerge when our bodies deteriorate because we abuse them through neglect. If we begin to have major, life-threatening health issues we could help or prevent through personal initiation (good diet and exercise), then not taking action is sinful because it’s like telling God that we don’t care. In essence, we are wishing ourselves dead (in extreme cases).  

Many individuals are naturally healthy and don’t need to work out or eat exceptionally well. We aren’t talking about people like that. We refer to those whose health is abysmal due to their poor lifestyle. Also, this writer wishes to encourage people to become active, not compel or force. There can be no legalism here because there is nothing sinful about those already well-off not choosing to become active. This is an area of application. But there are many benefits to eating right and keeping on the move, so we should encourage everyone to pursue this lifestyle. Proper diet and exercise will help with our overall mental and physical health, which can (indirectly) aid in receiving and applying the truth of God’s Word more effectively. However, we must be careful not to go too far with this whole concept because some of the greatest believers now and of all time have been poor and persecuted, and malnourished. We Christians are often at our best when deprived, a condition we will may all experience during our lifetimes. We may very well get to experience all of this first-hand during the tribulation when much of what we have will be taken away from us. 

Also, there are many great believers worldwide today who are perhaps malnourished. They are not less spiritually mature simply based on something out of their control. True spiritual success depends on how we use our free will, not on what we eat. Plus, living the Christian life may entail sacrificing things we often utilized. Deprivation and suffering often cause us to react more zealously by forcing us to rely more on God and less on ourselves. That is why trials, tribulations, and hardships are so important. They may force us to relinquish some of our past habits if absolutely necessary. 

Also, some people can’t afford the best food or don’t have the time or the means to pursue physical fitness. Yet all that matters is that they are doing what God wants them to do. So, to conclude, it is an excellent idea for believers to eat right and stay active if they can do so. But they don’t have to if they don’t need or feel led. Eating healthy certainly isn’t a bad idea considering all the unhealthy foods in the stores and restaurants we have today. It may very well be that Satan is attacking humanity indirectly through all the poor food we have on the market. But spiritual solutions always come about through free-will choice. As we grow spiritually, the Lord will guide us to make better decisions in life, a process that will occur naturally over time. 

We have to attend to other vital areas of our lives, such as work, family, and chores/errands. Those things are a necessary part of the life we have to live as humans. And yes, it is ok to have hobbies (which aren’t obligatory) as long as they do not interfere with our relationship with the Lord. But spiritual growth is mandatory for those who genuinely want to please their true Master. It is worth noting that as we continue to grow spiritually, we will begin to see ourselves wanting to spend more time with God and less on things we used to prioritize, such as sports and hobbies. The more we grow, the less time we waste on things that are perfectly fine but not the best use of our time if done to far too great an extent. Balance is critical in all of this. It is good to partake of enjoyable activities to some level because we don’t want to deprive ourselves of things that God has created or brought into our lives to enjoy (whatever the activity or hobby may be). Also, it is good to spend time outdoors in God’s beautiful creation! The activity (assuming it isn’t sinful or weakening our spiritual resolve) isn’t what matters. What is important is that we find at least some time to enjoy ourselves.  The same goes for eating healthily. It is ok and even good to enjoy some less healthy food during the week because God wants us to enjoy the things that He has given us access to. Living the Christian life doesn’t mean we have to throw everything else out (though some things may disappear entirely) but that we moderate them to properly correspond to the amount of time we will need to attend to our spiritual duties. 

This world and all it contains should always remain in second place to our walk with Jesus Christ, no questions asked. The process of growth, progress, and production must occur if one wants to please God. It just isn’t possible without these things because they cannot remain absent. There must be obedience and a zealous attitude to live one’s best for Christ. If we do this properly by heeding the Spirit’s prodding at every step, then all other areas of life will begin to fall into place. 

Although we have already touched on it, how we pray and study the Word is not important. In other words, the time of day and the amount of time we spend with God matters little as long as we are doing it. It is the inner attitude that matters. Everyone does things differently, and a typical day of Bible reading/study, prayer, and ministry will always vary among individuals. But consistency is key! The best approach is to get into a regular schedule that we do our best to stick with. Of course, Satan will try to oppose this in whatever way he can by throwing whatever distractions and temptations our way. You add to that the fact that our sinful flesh will naturally want to gravitate toward anything but spiritual activity. Our flesh does not like change, especially that which entails it’s arch-enemy, the spirit (**Galatians 5:17-25**). 

Suppose we have fallen into a bad habit of wasting our time throughout the day. For example, let’s say that we have become complacent and lazy in carrying out our daily responsibilities to God. We have developed a habit. Whatever we can learn, we can unlearn. As a wise woman once said regarding tree climbing, “*If you can get yourself up, you can get yourself down*.” If we can teach ourselves to waste time, we can do the same to accomplish the opposite- redeeming the time. The same goes for any habitual sin we may have fallen into. If we can get ourselves into it, we can (by free will and the grace and power of the Holy Spirit) get ourselves out of it. Easier said than done, but all assuredly possible with God’s help (**Matthew 19:26**). The power to improve and do likewise is right within us. We just have to do it on God’s terms (through faith and the Spirit’s control). 

It is best to develop a strict schedule and stick with it. The more consistent we become in our spiritual activities, the greater the wall of protection we build around ourselves against the flesh and all the spiritual darkness of the world. And no, there is no such thing as a believer who doesn’t have time for God. The Lord will always allow every believer the time, resources, and opportunities they need to grow spiritually and please Him. We all have the time; it is our choice whether we take it or not. And it could be that we need to rethink and rework our priorities and habits. Perhaps we need to spend less time doing certain things or work fewer hours in a week if needs be? Maybe we need to look for another job? If anything hinders us from giving ourselves over to God, we must eliminate whatever is necessary. 

Finally, God will never become angry with us just because we failed to read our Bibles and pray on any given day. That is not a sin and should never be something we feel condemned over. There will be times when our routine will be interrupted due to circumstances out of our control, such as traveling or whatever the case may be. Health issues are another one. Or maybe we were too tired or busy? Whatever the reason, missing the occasional day of our typical routine is not a big deal. The issue is whether we allow this to continue when it shouldn’t. The longer we go without the proper spiritual nutrition we need, the more likely we will become complacent and give into sin. Satan isn’t stupid! Therefore, we must always do our best not to expose our vulnerabilities and weakness to him! 

Complacency is already one of the biggest reasons the church is so lukewarm (**Revelation 3:14-22**), a trend no one should want to replicate. It is good to take breaks and get rest, although this doesn’t mean we ever take a break from God (since we need Him at all times). It is ok if we spend less time with the Lord on some days, even if we strive for a strict schedule that entails doing the same thing day in and day out. That is what we mean by strict; being consistent in fulfilling our spiritual duties every day. That doesn’t mean we will spend the same amount of time doing the same things every day, just that we do them daily as is best. We must also consider circumstances. What matters is that we take the time out of our lives to do what needs doing. And we should never view spiritual growth as a chore but as something we want and love to do from a willing heart. Thankfully, with time, the Holy Spirit will grant us a more willing heart that leads to a greater desire to stick with our resolve. 

In the end, there can be no room for complacency in the Christian life. It is very easy to find ourselves advancing well, only for us to sit down, relax, and loosen our grip on our efforts. But the moment we do this is the time when the devil does his best work. There can be no compromise. We must ALWAYS be alert and of a sober mind. 

{{% scripture p="1 Peter 5:8-10 (NIV)" %}} 

**8** Be alert and of sober mind. Your enemy the devil prowls around like a roaring lion looking for someone to devour. **9** Resist him, standing firm in the faith, because you know that the family of believers throughout the world is undergoing the same kind of sufferings. **10** And the God of all grace, who called you to his eternal glory in Christ, after you have suffered a little while, will himself restore you and make you strong, firm and steadfast.

{{% /scripture %}} 
