content/small-topical/should-christians-ever-lie-what-about-submitting-to-the-government.md, before:

---
title: Should Christians Ever Lie? What About Submitting to the Government?
---

This question is common in Christian circles because of the fear induced by those who forbid lying regardless of circumstances. The drive behind this thinking involves the many passages that forbid it. Since all sin is sin, how can it ever be a good thing? This reasoning is understandable, but there are times when things prohibited in the Bible are not sinful. For example, the Bible forbids taking the life of another, yet king David (as just one of many examples) slaughtered thousands in battle. We need only consider all our brothers and sisters who have served their time defending their countries. If a Christian can take the life of others to protect their fellow countrymen (most of whom are unbelievers), how much more is it permissible for them to lie to save the life of another brother and sister in Christ? The Bible commands us to love all men, especially those of the household of faith, because we have a special love reserved for them (**2 Peter 1:5-9**). 

So yes, the Bible supports that there are times when not telling the truth is justifiable. A prime example of this is Rahab mentioned in both the Old and New Testament for her exemplary behavior. She lied to her fellow citizens to hide two Israelites from among God’s chosen people. In so doing, she demonstrated her faith in God that she not only supported His servants but trusted in Him for the deliverance of herself and her family (**Joshua 2:1-21**). That is why James 2:25-26 mentions that she was justified by faith (corresponding to her deeds). Her actions were an act of faith. If she had not acted, then she would have had no faith. 

{{% scripture p="James 2:25-26 (NIV)" %}}  

**25** In the same way, was not even Rahab the prostitute considered righteous for what she did when she gave lodging to the spies and sent them off in a different direction? **26** As the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without deeds is dead. 

{{% /scripture %}}  

True, how many of us can say we have ever been in the same or similar circumstance as she was? Many of us have not experienced such a thing and may never (although we should never say never). But this has happened before throughout history with believers and unbelievers. Many people lied about hiding Jews in their homes during Nazi occupation of those countries in world war two. We believers have our own spiritual war to fight. If that involves a situation where a servant of Satan desires to take the life of a fellow soldier in Christ, then we would do well to do what we can and what is permissible for us to do to keep them safe. We can rest assured that the Lord will never allow us to face any situations we couldn’t handle. So, assuming we ever find ourselves in similar circumstances, the right thing to do will be clear enough so that all we have to do is make the right decision. Never would the Lord put us in a “puzzle” of a test that would be too difficult for us to figure out. If we are bent on continuing to hold fast to Him, He will show us what to do at the precise moment. 

{{% scripture p="Matthew 10:18-20 (NIV)" %}}  

**18** On my account you will be brought before governors and kings as witnesses to them and to the Gentiles. **19** But when they arrest you, do not worry about what to say or how to say it. At that time you will be given what to say, **20** for it will not be you speaking, but the Spirit of your Father speaking through you.                  

{{% /scripture %}}  

Similar to everything above is the issue of submitting to governmental authority. We have, on occasion, mentioned that Christians need to submit to the government unless what they ask of us is unbiblical (**Romans 13:1-7**, **Titus 3:1**, **1 Peter 2:13-15**). And regardless of what some may think, it is not the constitution or any written document to which we are to submit if those in charge have either altered it or are demanding something contrary to it. In other words, if the constitution says one thing, but those in authority are demanding something else contrary to what is says, we are still to submit to those in charge regardless of what the “written code” may say because the law of any country is in the hands of the people in power, which means they have the power to change it at any time if they choose to do so. The Bible commands us to submit to those in authority so that if everyone (or those in the highest positions) in the government agrees to do something not permitted by any written code, then we are to obey the leaders, not the written document itself on whatever particular points have been altered. This is the right thing to do because that is what the Bible means by submitting to governmental authority (we only disobey when asked to do something sinful or unbiblical). 

To continue, the tribulation will be a time when compliance (instead of resistance) will be of utmost importance. That does not mean we disobey God to serve men (**Acts 5:29**) or that we do anything unbiblical, quite the opposite. But as Christ submitted to His captors when they arrested Him, so we should do when the beast and his minions make every effort to arrest, imprison, torture, and kill us. Just as it was the Father’s will for Christ to die at the hands of sinful men (our Lord obeyed the Father’s plan for His life), so many of us believers alive during those seven years may well suffer death and mistreatment at the hands of evil men. But we can rest assured that whatever happens is part of the Lord’s plan for us. Assuming we are following Him closely as we should, it is likely that we will come to realize that whatever predicament we may find ourselves in was meant and planned by God all along. He knew about it long before He ever made the earth. 

{{% scripture p="Revelation 13:5-10 (ESV)" %}}  

**5** And the beast was given a mouth uttering haughty and blasphemous words, and it was allowed to exercise authority for forty-two months. **6** It opened its mouth to utter blasphemies against God, blaspheming his name and his dwelling, that is, those who dwell in heaven. **7** Also it was allowed to make war on the saints and to conquer them. And authority was given it over every tribe and people and language and nation, **8** and all who dwell on earth will worship it, everyone whose name has not been written before the foundation of the world in the book of life of the Lamb who was slain. **9** If anyone has an ear, let him hear: **10** If anyone is to be taken captive, to captivity he goes; if anyone is to be slain with the sword, with the sword must he be slain. Here is a call for the endurance and faith of the saints.                      

{{% /scripture %}}  

{{% scripture p="1 Peter 2:19-23 (ESV)" %}}  

**19** For this is a gracious thing, when, mindful of God, one endures sorrows while suffering unjustly. **20** For what credit is it if, when you sin and are beaten for it, you endure? But if when you do good and suffer for it you endure, this is a gracious thing in the sight of God. **21** For to this you have been called, because Christ also suffered for you, leaving you an example, so that you might follow in his steps. **22** He committed no sin, neither was deceit found in his mouth. **23** When he was reviled, he did not revile in return; when he suffered, he did not threaten, but continued entrusting himself to him who judges justly.                                             

{{% /scripture %}}  

Persecution of believers is something the government will permit and will become the standard rule for all who have chosen to follow Satan. It would be highly foolish and unwise to think any counterwar against the antichrist and his hordes would prevail and do any spiritual good. Not only will believers not be able to win (only God can defeat Satan), but those who may choose to take up arms against the beast risk compromising their faith and becoming partakers of his agenda.

Commit message:

Lying and submitting to the government

content/small-topical/should-christians-ever-lie-what-about-submitting-to-the-government.md, after:

---
title: Should Christians Ever Lie? What About Submitting to the Government?
---

## **Should Christians ever lie?**

This question is common in Christian circles because of the fear induced by those who forbid lying regardless of circumstances. The drive behind this thinking involves the many passages that forbid it. Since all sin is sin, how can it ever be a good thing? This reasoning is understandable, but there are times when things prohibited in the Bible are not sinful. For example, the Bible forbids taking the life of another, yet king David (as just one of many examples) slaughtered thousands in battle. We need only consider all our brothers and sisters who have served their time defending their countries. If a Christian can take the life of others to protect their fellow countrymen (most of whom are unbelievers), how much more is it permissible for them to lie to save the life of another brother and sister in Christ? The Bible commands us to love all men, especially those of the household of faith, because we have a special love reserved for them (**2 Peter 1:5-9**). 

So yes, the Bible supports that there are times when not telling the truth is justifiable. A prime example of this is Rahab mentioned in both the Old and New Testament for her exemplary behavior. She lied to her fellow citizens to hide two Israelites from among God’s chosen people. In so doing, she demonstrated her faith in God that she not only supported His servants but trusted in Him for the deliverance of herself and her family (**Joshua 2:1-21**). That is why James 2:25-26 mentions that she was justified by faith (corresponding to her deeds). Her actions were an act of faith. If she had not acted, then she would have had no faith. 

{{% scripture p="James 2:25-26 (NIV)" %}}  

**25** In the same way, was not even Rahab the prostitute considered righteous for what she did when she gave lodging to the spies and sent them off in a different direction? **26** As the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without deeds is dead. 

{{% /scripture %}}  

True, how many of us can say we have ever been in the same or similar circumstance as she was? Many of us have not experienced such a thing and may never (although we should never say never). But this has happened before throughout history with believers and unbelievers. Many people lied about hiding Jews in their homes during Nazi occupation of those countries in world war two. We believers have our own spiritual war to fight. If that involves a situation where a servant of Satan desires to take the life of a fellow soldier in Christ, then we would do well to do what we can and what is permissible for us to do to keep them safe. We can rest assured that the Lord will never allow us to face any situations we couldn’t handle. So, assuming we ever find ourselves in similar circumstances, the right thing to do will be clear enough so that all we have to do is make the right decision. Never would the Lord put us in a “puzzle” of a test that would be too difficult for us to figure out. If we are bent on continuing to hold fast to Him, He will show us what to do at the precise moment. 

{{% scripture p="Matthew 10:18-20 (NIV)" %}}  

**18** On my account you will be brought before governors and kings as witnesses to them and to the Gentiles. **19** But when they arrest you, do not worry about what to say or how to say it. At that time you will be given what to say, **20** for it will not be you speaking, but the Spirit of your Father speaking through you.                  

{{% /scripture %}}  

## **What about submitting to the government?** 

Similar to everything above is the issue of submitting to governmental authority. We have, on occasion, mentioned that Christians need to submit to the government unless what they ask of us is unbiblical (**Romans 13:1-7**, **Titus 3:1**, **1 Peter 2:13-15**). And regardless of what some may think, it is not the constitution or any written document to which we are to submit if those in charge have either altered it or are demanding something contrary to it. In other words, if the constitution says one thing, but those in authority are demanding something else contrary to what is says, we are still to submit to those in charge regardless of what the “written code” may say because the law of any country is in the hands of the people in power, which means they have the power to change it at any time if they choose to do so. The Bible commands us to submit to those in authority so that if everyone (or those in the highest positions) in the government agrees to do something not permitted by any written code, then we are to obey the leaders, not the written document itself on whatever particular points have been altered. This is the right thing to do because that is what the Bible means by submitting to governmental authority (we only disobey when asked to do something sinful or unbiblical). 

To continue, the tribulation will be a time when compliance (instead of resistance) will be of utmost importance. That does not mean we disobey God to serve men (**Acts 5:29**) or that we do anything unbiblical, quite the opposite. But as Christ submitted to His captors when they arrested Him, so we should do when the beast and his minions make every effort to arrest, imprison, torture, and kill us. Just as it was the Father’s will for Christ to die at the hands of sinful men (our Lord obeyed the Father’s plan for His life), so many of us believers alive during those seven years may well suffer death and mistreatment at the hands of evil men. But we can rest assured that whatever happens is part of the Lord’s plan for us. Assuming we are following Him closely as we should, it is likely that we will come to realize that whatever predicament we may find ourselves in was meant and planned by God all along. He knew about it long before He ever made the earth. 

{{% scripture p="Revelation 13:5-10 (ESV)" %}}  

**5** And the beast was given a mouth uttering haughty and blasphemous words, and it was allowed to exercise authority for forty-two months. **6** It opened its mouth to utter blasphemies against God, blaspheming his name and his dwelling, that is, those who dwell in heaven. **7** Also it was allowed to make war on the saints and to conquer them. And authority was given it over every tribe and people and language and nation, **8** and all who dwell on earth will worship it, everyone whose name has not been written before the foundation of the world in the book of life of the Lamb who was slain. **9** If anyone has an ear, let him hear: **10** If anyone is to be taken captive, to captivity he goes; if anyone is to be slain with the sword, with the sword must he be slain. Here is a call for the endurance and faith of the saints.                      

{{% /scripture %}}  

{{% scripture p="1 Peter 2:19-23 (ESV)" %}}  

**19** For this is a gracious thing, when, mindful of God, one endures sorrows while suffering unjustly. **20** For what credit is it if, when you sin and are beaten for it, you endure? But if when you do good and suffer for it you endure, this is a gracious thing in the sight of God. **21** For to this you have been called, because Christ also suffered for you, leaving you an example, so that you might follow in his steps. **22** He committed no sin, neither was deceit found in his mouth. **23** When he was reviled, he did not revile in return; when he suffered, he did not threaten, but continued entrusting himself to him who judges justly.                                             

{{% /scripture %}}  

Persecution of believers is something the government will permit and will become the standard rule for all who have chosen to follow Satan. It would be highly foolish and unwise to think any counterwar against the antichrist and his hordes would prevail and do any spiritual good. Not only will believers not be able to win (only God can defeat Satan), but those who may choose to take up arms against the beast risk compromising their faith and becoming partakers of his agenda.
