---
title: Should We Make Logistical Preparations for the Tribulation?
---

Many people unnecessarily stress themselves about how to prepare for the dark days of the coming tribulation. The best and only answer to give on being ready for it is to build up faith through spiritual growth, progress, and production (**Jude 20-25**). The Bible already answers all of these questions for us! We don’t need to become anxious by worrying whether or not we will know when the tribulation has begun and what it will accompany. We will understand all these things (assuming we have studied God’s Word thoroughly and made adequate spiritual preparations) when we see and experience them when they come. And for those truly committed believers who don’t know what is going on at first, it will soon become clear enough (as the passage below shows). 

{{% scripture p="Revelation 8:1-5 (ESV)" %}} 

**1** When the Lamb opened the seventh seal, there was silence in heaven for about half an hour. **2** Then I saw the seven angels who stand before God, and seven trumpets were given to them. **3** And another angel came and stood at the altar with a golden censer, and he was given much incense to offer with the prayers of all the saints on the golden altar before the throne, **4** and the smoke of the incense, with the prayers of the saints, rose before God from the hand of the angel. **5** Then the angel took the censer and filled it with fire from the altar and threw it on the earth, and there were peals of thunder, rumblings, flashes of lightning, and an earthquake. 

{{% /scripture %}} 

We may not be able to know the exact day or month when all these things will come about, but we can understand the signs of the times (**Matthew 16:3**) to help us realize that those testing days are near. Matthew 24 and, of course, the book of Revelation gives us some idea of what the “apocalypse” will look like. But there will, no doubt, be many details that we won’t quite yet see or understand, meaning that we may not know as much as we may want to. All that matters is that we know the God we serve (**Daniel 11:32**) and believe in all the promises He has given us in Scripture. The best thing to do is not worry about the future but concentrate instead on the present and whether we are where we should be. In other words, we don’t need to worry. 

It is not wrong to make logistical preparations for the tribulation as long as the person doing so understands that spiritual advance is the best and primary way they should be readying themselves ahead of time. They should not trust in their resources, as if failing to stock up means they won’t be ready once the time comes. Our trust is in the Lord, not in food, clothing, or whatever we may stash away. So bracing oneself in this manner is fine if done with proper reasons and motives. The person doing this needs to understand that whatever they have now will not benefit them nearly as much as the least amount of spiritual preparation beforehand. Plus, they may lose all they stored away or never end up getting to use any of it when the great moment arrives. There is a tremendous risk that so much hope is put in food and material possessions that faith won't survive the onslaught of tests and persecution when they fail to help (due to whatever circumstances unknown to us in the future). So either said person wasted too much time focusing on the wrong things (distracting them from growing in the Word), or they put so much faith in less crucial matters that they buckle under pressure when all the preparations they underwent fail. Now, this doesn’t imply that those who are getting ready in this manner are doomed to spiritual failure; many have and will do this only to realize the futility of such an endeavor once they see how useless it is/was. And it is most certainly possible that such preparations may prove to be an effective asset that works later on (perhaps God will use the resources to help other believers in need during those days). But the point is that whatever a person has now is something they could very quickly lose before they even get to enjoy it. The most important thing any Christian can emphasize is their spiritual health and whether it is developing as it should (**2 Peter 3:18**). As long as that is the emphasis and priority, storing up material goods is in no way sinful. Human plans and expectations can change and suffer disruption faster than in a blink of an eye because we never know what tomorrow might bring. 

{{% scripture p="Proverbs 19:21 (NIV)" %}} 

**21** Many are the plans in a person’s heart, but it is the Lord’s purpose that prevails.                                        

{{% /scripture %}} 

{{% scripture p="Proverbs 27:1 (NIV)" %}} 

Do not boast about tomorrow, for you do not know what a day may bring.                                     

{{% /scripture %}} 

Anxiety should never be a driving force in how we choose to prepare ourselves for the future. Anything done without faith is not going about it the right way if we do not trust God (**Romans 14:23**). It is arrogant and insulting to believe that our Lord is not sufficient to calm our nerves and sustain us in our present and future trials because He most certainly is. The problem is when we try to accomplish only something God can do. We are never going to fix any problems ourselves, which is why it is better to boast (appropriately) in our weaknesses and cast all burdens on the Lord (**2 Corinthians 12:9; Psalm 55:22**). 

Finally, Scripture is quite clear that we should never worry about food or clothing or any other earthy necessity because the Lord will provide for our every need whenever we may need them. Psalm 37:25 is a perfect example of this when it states, “*I was young and now I am old, yet I have never seen the righteous forsaken or their children begging bread*.” This passage tells us that although we may suffer deprivation for some time, nothing lasts forever. God will never leave or forsake us (**Hebrews 13:5; Matthew 28:20**) because His words are pure and cannot lie. Our present hardships are not something that will carry into eternity. And suppose it is the Lord’s will for a believer to live on and continue serving Him (assuming martyrdom is not in God’s plan for that individual). In that case, that person will not remain deprived forever, where they are constantly in need and barely able to survive. God will always take care of all His children. And He will ensure their mental, physical, and spiritual well-being, even if He tests them by deploying sickness (as discipline or testing) and spiritual testing to refine their faith for some time. Job and many other giants of the faith are perfect examples of this. 

We believers are not like the unbelieving world with no hope and every reason to despair. We have a heavenly Father looking out for us and looking over our shoulder at every instant. Whatever “hope” the world possess is one that will disappoint. But the believer's will reap them a bountiful crop in eternity. No matter how bad things get, we know that God is working everything out for our very good (**Romans 8:28**). So we must keep in mind at all times that God will sustain us whether we made prior logistical preparations or not. And although we watch for the “signs” and study what the Bible has to say about the end times, we must continue to strive to live in the present and take our walk day by day, moment by moment. Assuming we approach things this way, there will be, in all likelihood, less of a desire to store up food and clothing for the days to come.  The believer will come to realize just how fast time flies when they put their focus on living for Jesus Christ. 

{{% scripture p="Matthew 6:25-34 (NIV)" %}} 

**25** “Therefore I tell you, do not worry about your life, what you will eat or drink; or about your body, what you will wear. Is not life more than food, and the body more than clothes? **26** Look at the birds of the air; they do not sow or reap or store away in barns, and yet your heavenly Father feeds them. Are you not much more valuable than they? **27** Can any one of you by worrying add a single hour to your life? **28** “And why do you worry about clothes? See how the flowers of the field grow. They do not labor or spin. **29** Yet I tell you that not even Solomon in all his splendor was dressed like one of these. **30** If that is how God clothes the grass of the field, which is here today and tomorrow is thrown into the fire, will he not much more clothe you—you of little faith? **31** So do not worry, saying, ‘What shall we eat?’ or ‘What shall we drink?’ or ‘What shall we wear?’ **32** For the pagans run after all these things, and your heavenly Father knows that you need them. **33** But seek first his kingdom and his righteousness, and all these things will be given to you as well. **34** Therefore do not worry about tomorrow, for tomorrow will worry about itself. Each day has enough trouble of its own.                                    

{{% /scripture %}} 