---
title: Taming the Tongue
---

**James 3:5-12** suggests that the tongue is the most challenging part of the body for any human to control, and for a good reason. However, the battle always starts in the mind, where the results work their way down into our hearts (the place of our volition) and then express themselves through ours words and actions. That is why virtue thinking is such a critical practice of the Christian life, because if we attune our heart and mind to the Holy Spirit (**Proverbs 3:5-6**), we will speak and act as we should. So, in this case, we are what we think because what we believe determines what we do. We’ve all heard the phrase, “*You are what you eat*,” because our diets will help decide whether or not we are energetic or sluggish. Good physical nutrition will benefit our body far more than if we eat junk food all the time. So thinking on things above (**Colossians 3:2**) will be determined by dwelling on all that is true, noble, right, pure, lovely, admirable, and excellent or praiseworthy (**Philippians 4:8**).

As believers, we all encounter situations where Satan and our flesh want us to react most negatively to the circumstances around us, and one of the most obvious ways we do this is through speech. Our perspective of any given circumstance is always crucial because things are not always as they seem. We may fool ourselves into believing that a situation is something it isn’t, or that conditions are worse than they are. Humans suffer a big problem when discerning realities they perceive as this or that. But if we keep things in perspective, we won’t “*make a mountain out of a mole-hill*.” It is always best to be realistically optimistic to a degree where we ready ourselves for any activity by excepting that people can be rude and mean. We will face stressful times and situations. Stress is a reality, but we must learn to handle it with grace. And if someone “slaps us in the face,” we must turn the other cheek (**Matthew 5:38-40**). We should love our enemies and not return evil for evil. Though we may not feel like loving someone, we must not harbor bitterness or anger toward them because ongoing grudges tend to make matters worse, not better. Anger and frustration are not sins by themselves but must be kept under control and done away with before they lead to sin. Bitterness and resentment have no place in our hearts because no one can be that way for long without thinking badly of the other person. Yes, we may try to fool ourselves into believing that viewing someone negatively (in a sinful manner) is not a sin since we never spoke a word to them. But that is no different than saying adultery consists only of physical intercourse with another person not married to us, instead of mental and physical activity. Jesus said that whoever looks at a woman and lusts after her has committed adultery in his heart (**Matthew 5:27-28**). And whoever hates his brother murders in his own heart (**1 John 3:15**). 

For believers, having proper thoughts and motives ahead of time will prepare us for any harrowing ordeal that may come so that when they do, we will react to them as we should. But if we fail to attune ourselves to the Spirit by throwing off all self-control out of a selfish desire to put self before God, then our minds will turn sour, and then we will express our inner thoughts through all manner of poorly chosen words. Therefore, we must learn to think about godly things while under the Spirit’s control so that we do not act based on our desires but the Spirit’s. Indeed, this can take a tremendous amount of self-control so that we will have to resist all impure thoughts just as we would any other temptation. 

We have all heard the saying, “*Sticks and stones may break my bones, but words will never hurt me*.” That statement is false because words do hurt people. But what do we mean here? We don’t imply that offended parties should take it so personally that they allow it to knock them off their spiritual course and harbor bitterness, hate, and resentment to the other person. Of course, this also means not returning wrong for wrong, but turning the other cheek. It is not sinful to experience hurt feelings because those tend to be natural reactions to something someone said to us, even if they were true. But the offended person must still carefully consider how they will react to such behavior. There is a godly way to go about it and an unbiblical way to do so. We will experience pain from others occasionally, but we must not become overly sensitive so that we fall into self-pity by developing a “martyr syndrome.” We should never justify wrongdoing from others, but we must learn to forgive them even if they don’t apologize (**Matthew 6:14-15**). Nobody deserves forgiveness, as the parable of the unmerciful servant shows (**Matthew 18:21-35**). Christ forgave us a debt we couldn’t pay back, so we should forgive others who don’t deserve it either. 

It is not uncommon for both individuals involved in a heated discussion to mess up and sin against each other by what they say. Both people need to apologize to each other, even if much of what they said was true. It isn’t just words that matter, but the motivations that lie behind them. How we choose to express our feelings toward others can indicate where we stand with God, whether that speaks of a believer or unbeliever. Such poor attitudes exist that can only describe unbelief, such as is the case with Matthew 5:22. It states, “**22** *But I say to you that everyone who is angry with his brother will be liable to judgment; whoever insults his brother will be liable to the council; and whoever says, ‘You fool!’ will be liable to the hell of fire.* Anyone who means this reveals the true inner spiritual dead reality of their heart because saying this in such a high-handed way indicates unbelief, a case that falls into the category of words that condemn a person, Matthew 12:36-37. The verses state, *“ I tell you, on the day of judgment people will give account for every careless word they speak, **37** for by your words you will be justified, and by your words you will be condemned.”*

The above does not mean that saying certain things results in eternal separation from God because unbelief is the only true cause for that. The meaning is that how one thinks, speaks, and acts determines whether they are believers or not (faith without works is dead). So when someone lives in an ungodly lifestyle, they do so because they chose to reject Christ and so condemn themselves through their decision to serve sin, self, and Satan. And those who continue to worsen only increase and confirm their condemnation which the judgment will reveal. They will continue to go from bad to worse by storing up wrath for the great white throne to come (**Romans 2:5**). 

We must remember that there is a difference between speaking the truth impurely and speaking in love. Those who falsely slander others lie because what they say is dishonest, even if they had pure motives. Misunderstandings are bound to occur, but we must communicate our thoughts toward others in love in whatever we speak. We can say many wrong and destructive things to others that we could never hope to come up with a comprehensive list. More than that, there are many ways we can talk badly about other people, such as gossiping (talking behind other people’s backs), slander, false accusation, and lying. It matters little which method we take and what poor choice of words we come up with; all the things just mentioned are sinful. But as James 3:8-12 clarifies, we can use our tongues for good. 

{{% scripture p="James 3:8-12 (NIV)" %}} 

**8** but no human being can tame the tongue. It is a restless evil, full of deadly poison. **9** With the tongue we praise our Lord and Father, and with it we curse human beings, who have been made in God’s likeness. **10** Out of the same mouth come praise and cursing. My brothers and sisters, this should not be. **11** Can both fresh water and salt water flow from the same spring? **12** My brothers and sisters, can a fig tree bear olives, or a grapevine bear figs? Neither can a salt spring produce fresh water.                 

{{% /scripture %}} 

How a person speaks determines who they serve. At the very least, the manner of speech a person utilizes can indicate their level of spiritual maturity if they are actually believers. The passage above warns us that we can’t have it both ways. If we speak well to God but not to others, our prayers are useless, deceptive, and hypocritical. Those who don’t know how to love their neighbors don’t understand what it means to love God because our love for the Lord manifests itself in our treatment of other people. God will not listen to us if we have no intention of applying the truth. It is not for no reason that James states the following before delving into his discussion on taming the tongue. James 1:22-25 states, “ *But be doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving yourselves. **23** For if anyone is a hearer of the word and not a doer, he is like a man observing his natural face in a mirror; **24** for he observes himself, goes away, and immediately forgets what kind of man he was. **25** But he who looks into the perfect law of liberty and continues in it, and is not a forgetful hearer but a doer of the work, this one will be blessed in what he does.”* A perfect example of practicing one’s beliefs is treating others in a godly way as we want others to treat us (the golden rule **Matthew 7:12**). Words are essential, but they must coincide with actions for them to be effective in circumstances that require us to act. A prime example of saying but not doing is found in James 2:15-17, which says, *“ If a brother or sister is naked and destitute of daily food, **16** and one of you says to them, “Depart in peace, be warmed and filled,” but you do not give them the things which are needed for the body, what does it profit? **17** Thus also faith by itself, if it does not have works, is dead.”* 

To sum up this section, we cannot serve God and sin at the same time. Either we will submit to Christ in what we say, or we will serve ourselves by choosing what we want instead of what God desires. We can never serve two masters. Will we choose to live our lives for our Lord and Savior in everything we think, say, and do? 

There is always a time and a place for everything. This point doesn’t have as much to do with what we say as it does speaking the truth at the right time and location. We may have to wait till we communicate the truth to specific individuals because the circumstances may not allow for a smooth and effective “transfer” of words. This teaching is an area of application that every believer will have to discern for themselves. 

One clear teaching is that we should never throw pearls before swine (**Matthew 7:6**) because those in the wrong will only criticize and abuse the truth presented to them. But some people may be receptive. The difficult part is choosing a time and place to offer them the truth they need to hear. If the Lord wills, He will grant such opportunities. But if something isn’t meant to happen, it won’t occur. In other words, we have to be careful not to force ourselves on others. 