---
title: The Book of Life
---

Contrary to some beliefs, there are no “two books” of life. There is only one, and it contains the names of every believer that will have ever lived once history has run its entire course. The book of life is God’s book and, therefore, the “Lamb’s book of life.” Both titles refer to the same thing. 

Many scholars often miss that everyone (all people ever to live) starts in this book because Christ died for all and it was His will that none should perish, but that all should come to repentance (**1 John 2:2; 2 Peter 3:8-10**). The book of life is just that; God’s will for all people to be saved. A good example is a will left by parents for their children. The children do not have to take what their parents offer but may choose to refuse whatever they desire because no one can force belongings on them at any time. So too, God wants everyone to receive His offer of eternal life, which He wants everyone to accept (**John 3:16**). But most have and will continue to reject His mercy. All those who do so will have their names blotted out. Only those who accept the Lord’s grace will remain in His book forever. 

The whole reason everyone’s name starts in the book of life is for God to further show and demonstrate to all men that it was His desire for them to inherit eternal life. The purpose is to advertise the mercy, justice, and impartiality of God, a way of confirming His overall character (though our Lord doesn’t technically need a book for this). The book of life will be undeniable proof (in addition to what Scripture and creation already tell us) that Christ died for all men and not just a handful out of all the people that would ever live. So when an unbeliever stands before the great white throne, our Lord will show them that He wanted them to have eternal life and not end up where they are about to go. It is another way of confirming the unbelief of these individuals by showing them that they CHOSE to spend eternity away from God. In other words, they had their chance and muffed it. So their punishment is fair and just. The evil works that condemn them will indicate their life lived in unbelief, the unforgivable sin of unbelief as the cause of eternal separation.  

Passages that mention the book of life include **Revelation 3:5;13:8; 20:15; 21:27; 20:12; 17:8; 22;19; Philippians 4:3; Psalm 69:28; Daniel 12:1; Psalm 139:16; Exodus 32:31-33.** 

It is interesting why Moses asked God to blot his name out in Exodus 32:31-33. The people were living in unbelief, but Moses interceded for them that God would have mercy. Yet our Lord answered that only those who have sinned against Him (because of unbelief) would be blotted out. That is to say, only unbelievers will not remain in God’s book, while the names of all believers will. Once an unbeliever dies, their name is erased. 

Did some of the Israelites repent while they had a chance? It’s possible. But why would Moses ask the Lord to send him to hell for the sake of his fellow countrymen? It is true that  “*Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends,*” but that is not the same as dying for those who were clearly worthy of physical and eternal death. Tis true, no one deserves eternal life, but Christ has promised it to all who obey the gospel and eternal destruction for all who scorn it. We could ask, “would any believer die for an unbeliever during the tribulation?” The answer is obviously no, and our phrase most likely refers to a believer sacrificing his life for a fellow brother or sister.