---
title: The Danger of Gossiping
---

There is nothing wrong with talking about other people when it is relevant to the discussion for the sake of example to make a point. But gossiping (which is something else) is extremely dangerous for the believer’s daily walk because it often (though not always) entails slander from impure motives and a heart that enjoys speaking badly about someone. The truth is that we can talk about another person all day long while speaking nothing but the truth about them while doing it. So if what two people say about another is true, then why not talk about them? The questions to ask are, “*Do we need to talk about this person*” or “*Do we want to talk about them to take jabs at them behind their back*?” Again, we may need to discuss the conduct of others for the sake of coming up with a solution on how to deal or cope with them. If the topic revolves around fixating on a solution for the benefit of all parties involved in whatever issue, then the purpose behind the words spoken is pure and right. But if the reason is to gratify one’s desire to hurt another while they aren’t looking, then that is sinful. Whether what a person says is true or not, impure motives don’t stem from love. 

So it is not sinful to talk about other people when they aren’t around because the issue has to do with why and how we are doing so. But false accusations become slander (**Proverbs 20:19**), and right ones spoken impurely come from the flesh. Both are sinful. A person who bears false witness against another not only lies but hurts that individual by accusing them of something that is not true (**Proverbs 6:16-19**). Ephesians 4:29 states, “ *Let no corrupting talk come out of your mouths, but only such as is good for building up, as fits the occasion, that it may give grace to those who hear*.” So helping others may require us to discuss those who are causing trouble. The intention is not to hurt or discredit the other brother or sister but to help the one harmed by assisting them to overcome the damage they have sustained from the one who sinned against them originally.  And if we confront the wrongdoer, our speech toward them should be “*seasoned with grace*” so that Christ’s love may shine forth to them through spirit-led words and actions. But if we choose to act from our flesh, we will more likely display a carnal and indifferent behavior that harbors bitterness and resentment, a mindset that may cause us to discourage and hurt the person right back. We must never return evil for evil (**1 Peter 3:9**). You cannot fight fire with fire. 

We must keep in mind that even if we speak the truth about another person from a pure heart, it is best to be as brief as possible. The reason is that the longer we focus on the problem (*why does this person keep acting this way*), the more likely we are to sin in our speech. As Ephesians 4:26 says, “*Be angry and sin not*.” We must do all things purely and righteously that seeks to bring glory to God (**1 Corinthians 10:31**). Ephesians 4:26b also tells us not to allow the sun to go down on our wrath. So we need to say what we need to say and move on. 

Gossiping (assuming impure motives) is so dangerous on so many levels because it not only hurts the other person and makes them look bad (whether what is said is true or not) but exposes the inner heart condition of those who engage in this activity. The more pleasure we take from doing it, the harder our hearts grow toward that person, and the farther we drift from God. First, if we judge, it must be a righteous assessment (**John 7:24**). And if what we say is true but spoken poorly, then we still sin. That is why it is always best to be as brief, concise, and to the point as possible when talking about other people in a non-sinful way. The more we put someone else in the spotlight, the greater the chances of us misjudging them and growing bitter. 

Gossiping is never a good idea and puts one in deep waters. How can there ever be any love and unity among the body if all the parts seek to harm each other? Failing to correct this attitude will only open up a host of other sinful possibilities the flesh will be so quick to seize and engage in. The conclusion? Failing to fix even just one habitual and constant problem in one’s life will only cause more to come flooding in. 

To end this very brief discussion, none of the above in any way suggests we have to like all people, whether they are believers or unbelievers. The Bible commands us to love all men, even our enemies (**Matthew 5:44**). But there is a difference between disliking someone and hating them entirely. Dislike is not a sin, but hate is. 
