---
title: Using Logic in Biblical Interpretation
---

Logic is often intertwined with biblical interpretation, as we will explain below. But not in the way we may suppose. However, correctly interpreting all truth with its aid does not mean we sit back and exegete/interpret a passage based on what seems logical to us while disregarding the context, the languages, and everything else necessary for proper understanding of the text. That is dangerous to the extreme! We must never conclude a particular passage based on what seems right or wrong to us personally, as if the truth depended on our feelings and emotions. Instead, we must study the Word through the Spirit’s power while keeping everything in the context and comparing it with what the Bible has to say about that particular subject elsewhere. Learning how to pick out structures and themes from the text is critical in this process, along with having a good knowledge and understanding of the languages (assuming they are necessary for the interpretation). Textual criticism is another critical component (if required) that would be useful for a more in-depth teacher to have in their arsenal. Additionally, taking advantage of a good Bible teacher is crucial to learning God’s Word. All of these things the Spirit will help us use to decipher the truth whenever He leads us to use them when it is appropriate to do so. So, where does logic come into all this? 

Anytime we come to correct biblical conclusions, we have discovered something logical. God’s truth and He Himself is logical. Logic should never be used for biblical interpretation by itself (though it is possible to conclude some things with it alone), but often acts as a natural aid to proper interpretation. Studying and thinking out an issue correctly through proper exegesis is thinking logically because the methods used brought us to the truth (assuming we have it right). Logic is the only way we can make sense of those methods, especially when dealing with the languages. 

Therefore, we utilize logic when studying and interpreting the Bible, even if indirectly and in conjunction with the Spirit combined with the proper exegetical tools and the right spiritual approach/attitude. Plus, if we know a truth based on what one passage says, then we know that other passages that discuss the very same issue will line up with that other passage because logic tells us that Scripture cannot contradict itself (even if the two verses seem to disagree with one another). It is not the Bible which gets things wrong. Instead, it is us fallible human beings. How could we make sense of the truth without the ability to reason (which all logic entails)? 

With the above said, every believer, whether teacher or layperson, uses logic alongside the correct and biblical approach to discern the meaning of a passage. The truth is that we do it all the time, whether we are aware of it or not. We cannot rely on it alone (far from it). But we will use it by nature (because of how God made us) even if we don’t realize it. We don’t have to know we are doing something for it to occur in our minds because what we think of it doesn’t matter. 

However, Bible teachers should do their best not to explain the truth through normal (and especially not formal which deals with numbers) logic but through Scripture alone and the tools necessary to decipher the meaning (depending on what they are and if they are required in the first place). Logic (in conjunction with everything else) can help us come to the right conclusions. But it may be tricky and perhaps confusing to use it to explain the meaning of a verse to one’s listeners. Therefore, it is better to avoid using it to show how one came to the correct conclusions because that would be a very difficult (if not impossible in many cases) task. Not only is it impossible for anyone to perfectly remember how they used their mind and engaged their brain to discover the truth, but explaining some of it to others will most likely only confuse them unnecessarily. There are exceptions to this, however, because some people just learn differently than others. But those individuals most likely comprise the minority. Most people don’t need to see all the details of how a Bible teacher came to the conclusions they did, but the truth properly presented and supported. The fruit of a pastor’s labor will speak for itself. We will always need to use Scripture to support our teachings. Textual criticism and the biblical languages will also come into play whenever and wherever they are needed. But we don’t need to explain how our brains reasoned to use them (and anything else) to come to the truth. All other outside methods of interpretation do require logic in order to make sense of them, but it is the Holy Spirit who will empower our thinking and reasoning to use those tools correctly when the need arises. 

The following is a courtesy of Bartek Sylwestrzak (part of an original comment written by him). All rights and credit for everything below in this comment goes to him. 

*The fact that God cannot be fully comprehended by us does not mean that He is illogical, quite contrary. Every page of the Bible testifies to that - to the justice, coherence and consistency of His ways. Some of His logic may be beyond us, some may be hidden for ages only to be revealed later on. But none of His works are illogical, something we can appreciate whenever we get to understand them. Logic is inseparably bound to the truth - if our God is a God of truth, then He cannot be a God of truth and of lie at the same time, that's logic. If He is just, He cannot be unjust, that's logic.* 

*He has endowed us with the capacity to think logically (just as He has given us the capacity to choose, the conscience, etc.) exactly in order for us to draw true conclusions about Him from what He has revealed about Himself and not be led astray by reasoning that is not governed by the principles that He laid out. This is also why drawing a distinction between "God's logic" and "human logic" is erroneous. There are no several types of logic, just as there are no several truths. Neither the truth nor logic are relative. The fact that our logical reasoning is limited and we may err as we try to exercise it should not cause us to perceive it as being of different nature than God's or abandon it altogether - since it is in fact He who has endowed us with the ability to reason logically in such a way that we are able to understand Him to the degree He allowed us. Two plus two must equal four, whether this is viewed from the perspective of God or man. If God is just then He cannot be unjust, whether this is viewed from the perspective of God or man, etc.* 

*God set the rules, not us. So we follow the rules, not set them. Whatever conclusion we draw about God must be in line with everything else we know about Him - that's logic. Every element must fit with all the others. To go beyond that is an error.* 