content/small-topical/what-is-an-acceptable-level-of-control-over-sin.md, before:

---
title: What is an Acceptable Level of Control Over Sin?
---

## Trying to parse specific lines is not the right approach

There is no specific level of control the Bible gives to have over sin, a level after which we can kick back and view our sanctification as well-in-hand. The best answer we can provide is that Christianity is far more than whitewashed legalism, so we ought not over-focus on sin as long as it is truly not habitual. But then someone may ask, “what do you define as habitual?” Again, the Bible gives no specific answer to this question either. But it may be best to summarize that as long as we are growing in our walk with the Lord and gaining better control over our “bad habits,” then that is all that matters. In other words, instead of staying the same (if that is even possible) or getting worse, we are getting better. That is the biggest sign we are advancing as we should.

## Overcoming sin is inside out, not outside in

We don’t want sin to be constant in our lives to a point where we are continuously stumbling in more serious areas all the time. Our Lord commands us to be holy and give our best without compromise (**1 Peter 1:16**). All believers must strive to sin as little as possible, requiring that they take up their crosses and follow the Lord (**Matthew 16:24**). What matters is that we are making an effort (and we should only give our best effort to the Lord). This process in itself may be painful and time-consuming (**Hebrews 12:4**). But we must be willing to suffer (**1 Peter 4:1**). The battle itself is the Lord’s, and only He can accomplish sanctification in our lives. This process starts inwardly and works its way outwardly, not the other way around! 

For information on the process of defeating sin, please see [**Overcoming Sin**](/large-topical/overcoming-sin/).

## No matter how much we progress, every single one of us still sins every day

However, we must remember that all believers sin every day and that no one is perfect. This truth means that we must confess our sins daily, even multiple times a day. As often as necessary to restore our fellowship with God after we have "dirtied our feet" (**John 13:1-11**). 

{{% scripture p="1 John 1:8-10 (ESV)" %}} 

**8** If we say we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us. **9** If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. **10** If we say we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his word is not in us.

{{% /scripture %}} 

{{% scripture p="1 John 1:9 (NKJV)" %}} 

**9** If we confess our sins, He is faithful and just to forgive us *our* sins and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.

{{% /scripture %}}

Commit message:

What is an acceptable level of control over sin- topic description

content/small-topical/what-is-an-acceptable-level-of-control-over-sin.md, after:

---
title: What is an Acceptable Level of Control Over Sin?
summary: 
   The question of this topic is what this page will address. 
---

## Trying to parse specific lines is not the right approach

There is no specific level of control the Bible gives to have over sin, a level after which we can kick back and view our sanctification as well-in-hand. The best answer we can provide is that Christianity is far more than whitewashed legalism, so we ought not over-focus on sin as long as it is truly not habitual. But then someone may ask, “what do you define as habitual?” Again, the Bible gives no specific answer to this question either. But it may be best to summarize that as long as we are growing in our walk with the Lord and gaining better control over our “bad habits,” then that is all that matters. In other words, instead of staying the same (if that is even possible) or getting worse, we are getting better. That is the biggest sign we are advancing as we should.

## Overcoming sin is inside out, not outside in

We don’t want sin to be constant in our lives to a point where we are continuously stumbling in more serious areas all the time. Our Lord commands us to be holy and give our best without compromise (**1 Peter 1:16**). All believers must strive to sin as little as possible, requiring that they take up their crosses and follow the Lord (**Matthew 16:24**). What matters is that we are making an effort (and we should only give our best effort to the Lord). This process in itself may be painful and time-consuming (**Hebrews 12:4**). But we must be willing to suffer (**1 Peter 4:1**). The battle itself is the Lord’s, and only He can accomplish sanctification in our lives. This process starts inwardly and works its way outwardly, not the other way around! 

For information on the process of defeating sin, please see [**Overcoming Sin**](/large-topical/overcoming-sin/).

## No matter how much we progress, every single one of us still sins every day

However, we must remember that all believers sin every day and that no one is perfect. This truth means that we must confess our sins daily, even multiple times a day. As often as necessary to restore our fellowship with God after we have "dirtied our feet" (**John 13:1-11**). 

{{% scripture p="1 John 1:8-10 (ESV)" %}} 

**8** If we say we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us. **9** If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. **10** If we say we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his word is not in us.

{{% /scripture %}} 

{{% scripture p="1 John 1:9 (NKJV)" %}} 

**9** If we confess our sins, He is faithful and just to forgive us *our* sins and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.

{{% /scripture %}}
