---
title: About the Author - The Purpose of this Ministry 
---

My name is Jordan Lee Bomberger, and I grew up in Glen Burnie, Maryland but have since moved to central Georgia in January of 2021 (although I may be moving again in the future). I grew up attending Baptist and non-denominational/community churches but have since withdrawn a few years ago. As of writing this sentence, I am preparing to be part of a house church in the same house I share with the owner (a good Christian friend of mine). I am also in contact with other like-minded believers through email and WhatsApp and regularly communicate with some of them. My love for the Lord has grown over the years as I have repeatedly seen Him work wonders in my life. I’ve been saved for most of my life since I was a very young child but didn’t truly begin taking my walk with the Lord seriously until 2016. That year, my love for the Lord increased, and my search for greater truth began. My thirst for answers about many doctrines and truths misunderstood in most churches today was quenched when I accepted the teachings found on Ichthys-Bible Studies for Spiritual Growth in August of 2017. I have since grown under that ministry, and everything else went on from there to this present day.

I have independently studied systematic theology, verse-by-verse teaching, ancient and church history and geography, and various other related subjects. I have acquired much of my knowledge of the Biblical teachings thanks to the help of Robert D. Luginbill of **[Ichthys-Bible Studies for Spiritual Growth](https://www.ichthys.com/)** and Curtis Omo of **[Bible Academy](https://bibleacademyonline.com/omo/author/como281aol-com/)**. Despite lacking formal education and knowledge of the original languages (Greek and Hebrew), I still felt led by the Lord to teach to some capacity within my range of knowledge. I have familiarized myself with some words from the original languages on certain passages where they are critical. Much thanks to the ministries of Robert D. Luginbill and Curtis Omo for help with that. In days to come, I will continue to strive to increase my overall knowledge to make these online teachings the best they can be. In addition to teaching, I believe I also possess the gift of giving and prayer. Yes, this writer believes that believers can have more than one spiritual gift.

This is a non-profit ministry and is not associated with any denomination. This ministry lies within the evangelical protestant ring (although I have parted ways with many of the common teachings found throughout that arena). Additionally, all of the work written on this site (except for excerpts and quotes from others) was written by myself, Jordan L. Bomberger.

This ministry aims to help advance the spiritual growth, progress, and production of other believers seeking a deeper understanding of some of the Scripture’s most essential teachings. Considering there is little in-depth Bible teaching in most churches today, there are very few places a believer can receive proper spiritual nutrition. This lack of in-depth Bible teaching has negatively impacted most believers who have chosen to attend churches that suit their tastes and desires. **([2 Timothy 4:3](https://biblia.com/bible/nasb95/2 Tim 4.3))**. An indifferent attitude toward God’s Word has led to a spiritually unhealthy, malnourished, and lukewarm Christian society, which sits on the cusp of the most horrific period the world will have ever witnessed- the great tribulation **([Revelation 3:14-22](https://biblia.com/bible/nasb95/Rev 3.14-22)).** Since time is short, this writer aims to help believers prepare for those most difficult times ahead. The second advent of Christ is not far off **([1 Peter 4:7](https://biblia.com/bible/nasb95/1 Pet 4.7), [James 5:8](https://biblia.com/bible/nasb95/James 5.8), [Revelation 22:12](https://biblia.com/bible/nasb95/Rev 22.12), [1 John 2:18](https://biblia.com/bible/nasb95/1 John 2.18))**, but the church will have to undergo the tribulation as a form of discipline for its lukewarmness. Since this is the case, this author desires to help prepare any believers willing to listen for the second and final coming of their Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ.

Most believers in our day and age like to “rest” in their salvation, but they do not know what it means to love the Lord their God with all their heart, soul, and mind because they do not understand spiritual growth or the true meaning of love. Many within the church carry an “alternate” outlook on how the Christian life is to be lived based upon their own desires. But the problem with that is that life becomes all about the individual and what they want to do, not about what the Lord would have them do. In other words, people do what they want regardless if its’ what’s best for them or not, and that is what makes the difference between those who are red-hot and those who are lukewarm. Believers who know what it means to love God as they should submit to Him without compromise by putting His will before their own **([Proverbs 3:6](https://biblia.com/bible/nasb95/Prov 3.6))**

Misguided desires (love for the world) and false expectations (a pre-tribulation rapture) bring consequences. The tribulation will prove this when one-third of believers fall away from the faith during an event known as the great apostasy **([Matthew 24](https://biblia.com/bible/nasb95/Matt 24), [Revelation 12:4](https://biblia.com/bible/nasb95/Rev 12.4), [2 Thessalonians 2:3](https://biblia.com/bible/nasb95/2 Thess 2.3)).** Much of this will undoubtedly be because such individuals had little faith stored up. False teaching has taken a terrible toll on many who believe the church will not see the tribulation. For this and other reasons, complacency has set in, rendering many believers unprepared for what is to come. Let not this one fact escape our attention; believers will suffer in this life. But rest assured, we can overcome any trials that come our way through Christ’s power, all while being joyful.

It is out of great love for God and for my brothers and sisters that I wrote these studies. I desire that those reading this material may reap a bountiful crop in eternity and receive a “well done good and faithful servant” from Christ on that great day. The intended goal is for the mutual edification and building up of Christ’s church by helping those He loved so much by dying on the cross to pay for their sins. We want to be ready to stand before Christ one day in confident assurance that we did what we were supposed to do. To have this confidence, we must be zealous for the Lord by pursuing Him with all our hearts. There can be no compromising in this life, for we live and breathe to demonstrate before God, men, and angels just how much we love our Creator.

I hope anyone who reads this material will search with an open mind. If we approach anything with an open heart, one bent on seeking to grow closer to the Lord by discovering more and more of His truth; then we will find the answers. Asking and seeking cannot be separated because they go hand in hand **([Matthew 7:7](https://biblia.com/bible/nasb95/Matt 7.7), [2 Timothy 2:15](https://biblia.com/bible/nasb95/2 Tim 2.15), [2 Timothy 3:16](https://biblia.com/bible/nasb95/2 Tim 3.16))**. So when searching for truth, we seek the Lord’s opinion first and foremost, before all else. If we approach things this way, we will get what we are looking for because our heavenly Father never lies. So let’s ask for His guidance instead of relying on our own strength.

Getting truth may require a significant investment of time and energy. It can be painful because modern Christianity has prevented many believers from coming out of their comfort zones. But for the believer determined to find answers, all things come to an end, including suffering. If we continue searching God’s Word, the Lord will take care of the rest. For if we take care of the Bible, it will take care of us. Christ will never fail us, and how likely we are to accomplish a goal depends on how much we genuinely desire to complete it. That takes initiative, and if we do our part, then God will do His as well, no questions asked. The only thing keeping a believer from pleasing the Lord as they should is themselves. Therefore, attitude is vital, for humility brings many great rewards.

This ministry is just as much exhortation as it is teaching (**[1 Timothy 6:3](https://biblia.com/bible/nasb95/1 Tim 6.3)**). Our Lord desires us not only to be hearers of the Word but to be doers **([James 1:22](https://biblia.com/bible/nasb95/James 1.22))**. To prepare for eternity, we have to apply what we know to be true. The time remaining till Christ’s return is short, and so there is a sense of sober urgency that the believer should currently have about their time on earth. These studies are designed to be simple, straightforward, and easy to understand so that the reader may catch on as quickly as possible and react appropriately. The time remaining is running out, so the idea is to help point the reader in the right direction to help them get going as quickly as possible.

Finally, although I, Jordan L. Bomberger, wrote the material presented on this site, I give God all the glory for making all of this possible. Compared to Him, I am nothing. These studies are what He has produced in me, and I could not have done any of them without His help. May our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ be glorified for all eternity!

{{% scripture p="Psalm 113" %}}  

Praise the Lord! Praise *Him*, you servants of the Lord, Praise the name of the Lord. **2** Blessed be the name of the Lord From this time *on* and forever. **3** From the rising of the sun to its setting, The name of the Lord is to be praised. **4** The Lord is high above all nations; His glory is above the heavens. **5** Who is like the Lord our God, Who is enthroned on high, **6** Who looks far down to The heavens and the earth? **7** He raises the poor from the dust, He lifts the needy from the garbage heap, **8** To seat *them* with noblemen, With the noblemen of His people. **9** He has the infertile woman live in the house *As* a joyful mother of children. Praise the Lord!

{{% /scripture %}}  