content/about.md, before:

---
title: About the Author - The Purpose of this Ministry 
---

## **About the Author** 

My name is Jordan L Bomberger, and I grew up in Glen Burnie, Maryland which is my current place of residence. I grew up attending Baptist and non-denominational/community churches but have since withdrawn a few years ago. I am in contact with other like-minded believers all over the world through email, zoom, and WhatsApp and regularly communicate with some of them (also attempting to plug into an in-person Bible study for ministry, community, and to be light and witness to other believers). I’ve been saved for most of my life since I was a very young child but didn’t truly begin taking my walk with the Lord seriously until 2016. That year, my love for the Lord and His Word increased, and my search for greater biblical truth began. My thirst for answers about many truths misunderstood in most churches today was quenched when I accepted the teachings found on Ichthys-Bible Studies for Spiritual Growth in August of 2017. I have since grown under that ministry, and everything else went on from there to this present day. Before that time, I lacked a good solid teaching ministry where I could grow spiritually because I was not getting fed well in any of the churches I attended (and currently don't know of any I could attend or recommend for that very purpose). 

I have independently studied the Bible myself, systematic theology, verse-by-verse teaching, ancient and church history and geography, and various other related subjects. I have acquired much of my knowledge of the Bible thanks to the help of Dr. Robert D. Luginbill of **[Ichthys - Bible Studies for Spiritual Growth](https://www.ichthys.com/)** and Curtis M. Omo of **[Bible Academy](https://bibleacademyonline.com/omo/author/como281aol-com/)**. Despite lacking formal education and knowledge of the original languages (Greek and Hebrew), I still felt led by the Lord to teach to some capacity within my range of knowledge. I have familiarized myself with some words from the original languages on certain passages where they are critical. Much thanks to the ministries of Dr. Luginbill and Curtis Omo for help with that. 

## **About this Ministry** 

This is a non-profit ministry and is not associated with any denomination. This ministry lies within the evangelical protestant ring (although I have parted ways with many of the common teachings found throughout that arena). Additionally, all of the work written on this site (except for excerpts and quotes from others) was written by myself.

## **The Purpose of this Ministry** 

This ministry aims to help advance the spiritual growth, progress, and production of other believers seeking a deeper understanding of some of the Scripture’s most essential teachings. Considering there is little in-depth Bible teaching in most churches today, there are very few places a believer can receive proper spiritual nutrition. This lack of in-depth Bible teaching has negatively impacted most believers who have chosen to attend churches that suit their tastes and desires (**2 Timothy 4:3**). An indifferent attitude toward God’s Word has led to a spiritually unhealthy, malnourished, and lukewarm Christian society, which sits on the cusp of the most horrific period the world will have ever witnessed---the great tribulation (**Revelation 3:14-22**). Due to a lack of good spiritual food in most churches today, this ministry seeks to put the focus on Scripture and help "fill in the gap" (along with all other ministries I recommend that have done and are attempting to do the same thing). 

This ministry is just as much exhortation as it is teaching (**1 Timothy 6:3**). Our Lord desires us not only to be hearers of the Word but to be doers (**James 1:22**). To prepare for eternity, we have to apply what we know to be true. The time remaining till the tribulation (and Christ’s return thereafter) is short, and so there is a sense of sober urgency that the believer should currently have about their time on earth (although that should have always been the case for all believers of all time). These studies are designed to be simple, straightforward, and easy to understand so that the reader may catch on as quickly as possible and react appropriately. The time remaining is running out, so the idea is to help point the reader in the right direction to help them get going as quickly as possible.

Finally, although I wrote the material presented on this site, I give God all the glory for making all of this possible. These studies are what He has produced in me, and I could not have done any of them without His help. May our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ be glorified for all eternity!

{{% scripture p="Psalm 113" %}}  

Praise the Lord! Praise *Him*, you servants of the Lord, Praise the name of the Lord. **2** Blessed be the name of the Lord From this time *on* and forever. **3** From the rising of the sun to its setting, The name of the Lord is to be praised. **4** The Lord is high above all nations; His glory is above the heavens. **5** Who is like the Lord our God, Who is enthroned on high, **6** Who looks far down to The heavens and the earth? **7** He raises the poor from the dust, He lifts the needy from the garbage heap, **8** To seat *them* with noblemen, With the noblemen of His people. **9** He has the infertile woman live in the house *As* a joyful mother of children. Praise the Lord!

{{% /scripture %}}

Commit message:

Blue Letter Bible- Resources and About the Author

content/about.md, after:

---
title: About the Author - The Purpose of this Ministry 
---

## **About the Author** 

My name is Jordan L Bomberger, and I grew up in Glen Burnie, Maryland which is my current place of residence. I grew up attending Baptist and non-denominational/community churches but have since withdrawn a few years ago. I am in contact with other like-minded believers all over the world through email, zoom, and WhatsApp and regularly communicate with some of them (also attempting to plug into an in-person Bible study for ministry, community, and to be light and witness to other believers). I’ve been saved for most of my life since I was a very young child but didn’t truly begin taking my walk with the Lord seriously until 2016. That year, my love for the Lord and His Word increased, and my search for greater biblical truth began. My thirst for answers about many truths misunderstood in most churches today was quenched when I accepted the teachings found on Ichthys-Bible Studies for Spiritual Growth in August of 2017. I have since grown under that ministry, and everything else went on from there to this present day. Before that time, I lacked a good solid teaching ministry where I could grow spiritually because I was not getting fed well in any of the churches I attended (and currently don't know of any I could attend or recommend for that very purpose). 

I have independently studied the Bible myself, systematic theology, verse-by-verse teaching, ancient and church history and geography, and various other related subjects. I have acquired much of my knowledge of the Bible thanks to the help of Dr. Robert D. Luginbill of **[Ichthys - Bible Studies for Spiritual Growth](https://www.ichthys.com/)** and Curtis M. Omo of **[Bible Academy](https://bibleacademyonline.com/omo/author/como281aol-com/)**. Despite lacking formal education and knowledge of the original languages (Greek and Hebrew), I still felt led by the Lord to teach to some capacity within my range of knowledge. I have familiarized myself with some words from the original languages on certain passages where they are critical. Much thanks to the ministries of Dr. Luginbill and Pastor Curtis Omo for help with that. I also find Blue Letter Bible to be a useful resource when that is sufficient (https://www.blueletterbible.org/). 

## **About this Ministry** 

This is a non-profit ministry and is not associated with any denomination. This ministry lies within the evangelical protestant ring (although I have parted ways with many of the common teachings found throughout that arena). Additionally, all of the work written on this site (except for excerpts and quotes from others) was written by myself.

## **The Purpose of this Ministry** 

This ministry aims to help advance the spiritual growth, progress, and production of other believers seeking a deeper understanding of some of the Scripture’s most essential teachings. Considering there is little in-depth Bible teaching in most churches today, there are very few places a believer can receive proper spiritual nutrition. This lack of in-depth Bible teaching has negatively impacted most believers who have chosen to attend churches that suit their tastes and desires (**2 Timothy 4:3**). An indifferent attitude toward God’s Word has led to a spiritually unhealthy, malnourished, and lukewarm Christian society, which sits on the cusp of the most horrific period the world will have ever witnessed---the great tribulation (**Revelation 3:14-22**). Due to a lack of good spiritual food in most churches today, this ministry seeks to put the focus on Scripture and help "fill in the gap" (along with all other ministries I recommend that have done and are attempting to do the same thing). 

This ministry is just as much exhortation as it is teaching (**1 Timothy 6:3**). Our Lord desires us not only to be hearers of the Word but to be doers (**James 1:22**). To prepare for eternity, we have to apply what we know to be true. The time remaining till the tribulation (and Christ’s return thereafter) is short, and so there is a sense of sober urgency that the believer should currently have about their time on earth (although that should have always been the case for all believers of all time). These studies are designed to be simple, straightforward, and easy to understand so that the reader may catch on as quickly as possible and react appropriately. The time remaining is running out, so the idea is to help point the reader in the right direction to help them get going as quickly as possible.

Finally, although I wrote the material presented on this site, I give God all the glory for making all of this possible. These studies are what He has produced in me, and I could not have done any of them without His help. May our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ be glorified for all eternity!

{{% scripture p="Psalm 113" %}}  

Praise the Lord! Praise *Him*, you servants of the Lord, Praise the name of the Lord. **2** Blessed be the name of the Lord From this time *on* and forever. **3** From the rising of the sun to its setting, The name of the Lord is to be praised. **4** The Lord is high above all nations; His glory is above the heavens. **5** Who is like the Lord our God, Who is enthroned on high, **6** Who looks far down to The heavens and the earth? **7** He raises the poor from the dust, He lifts the needy from the garbage heap, **8** To seat *them* with noblemen, With the noblemen of His people. **9** He has the infertile woman live in the house *As* a joyful mother of children. Praise the Lord!

{{% /scripture %}}
