---
title: James 1:13-18 Lesson 4
weight: 500
summary: Temptations versus Tests and the source of both. 
---

## **Temptations vs Tests** 

## **Verse 13** 

{{% scripture p="James 1:13 (ESV)" %}}

**13** When tempted, no one should say, “God is tempting me.” For God cannot be tempted by evil, nor does he tempt anyone;                                                                                

{{% /scripture %}}    

### God tempts no one 

A little explanation is necessary to clear up any possible confusion this verse presents to many readers. As other pastors and theologians have recognized, there is a big difference between the meaning of the Greek words for trials in James chapter one, verses two and twelve, and the words “tempted” and “tempting” in verse thirteen (the context is also a giveaway). The Greek word for trials in verses two and twelve is *peirasmos* (a noun) and refers more to major tests of faith that the Lord allows us to go through to grow us spiritually (to develop perseverance or endurance). The word can refer to temptations or being tempted but can also mean tests of faith from God.  

On the contrary, the English transliteration of the word “tempted” in verse thirteen is *peirazo* (verb) and can also have both meanings. But in this context, the word refers to enticements to sin (similar words but with different meanings in different verses). It was “tempting” for many of James’s readers to feel as if God was enticing them to sin by testing them in such difficult ways. They figured that because of the overwhelming severity of the trials they faced, God was trying to get them to fail. This was one of the other reasons James had to write them on this issue. They had a twisted view of Christian suffering. The trials they faced were from God and meant to grow, not weaken, their faith by giving it more of an opportunity to express itself through works of obedience. This process would then strengthen their faith by getting it accustomed to pressure. The more suffering a believer learns to take, the more they get used to handling it, and they begin to “toughen up.” 

Trials are from God meant for our success, while temptations (as we typically understand them) are from the flesh and the Devil and are meant for our failure and spiritual compromise. There is a big difference between the two regarding motivations and intentions. God wants what’s best for us (as verse seventeen shows), while Satan desires only the absolute worst. Some of the Jews in our context, like Job, began to imagine a “Phantom deity” (Merrill F. Unger- Unger’s Commentary on the Old Testament- page 691) whose hand was against them. In reality, God was FOR them and desired their absolute best (as He does for all people). The passage below, although long, expresses this principle most beautifully. 

{{% scripture p="Romans 8:28-39 (ESV)" %}}

**28** And we know that for those who love God all things work together for good, for those who are called according to his purpose. **29** For those whom he foreknew he also predestined to be conformed to the image of his Son, in order that he might be the firstborn among many brothers. **30** And those whom he predestined he also called, and those whom he called he also justified, and those whom he justified he also glorified. **31** What then shall we say to these things? **If God is for us**, **who can be against us**? **32** He who did not spare his own Son but gave him up for us all, how will he not also with him graciously give us all things? **33** Who shall bring any charge against God's elect? It is God who justifies. **34** Who is to condemn? Christ Jesus is the one who died—more than that, who was raised—who is at the right hand of God, who indeed is interceding for us. **35** Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall **tribulation**, or **distress**, or **persecution**, or famine, or nakedness, or danger, or sword? **36** As it is written, “For your sake we are being killed all the day long; we are regarded as sheep to be slaughtered.” **37** No, in all these things we are more than conquerors through him who loved us. **38** For I am sure that neither death nor life, nor angels nor rulers, nor things present nor things to come, nor powers, **39** nor height nor depth, nor anything else in all creation, will be able to separate us from the love of God in Christ Jesus our Lord.                

{{% /scripture %}}     

We will discuss the subject of sin and why we commit it in our next two verses. But we are always at fault for our wrongdoings (we must learn to take full responsibility for our sins). Never is it the case that we must give in to temptation or that the flesh and the Devil have the liberty to override our free will and force us to do something we shouldn’t and don’t want to do (there has never been a case of “the Devil made me do it”). 

Additionally, there is no reason to believe that all temptations are from the Devil. I think Satan gets too much credit regarding temptation, and that is because he is not like God, who is omnipresent. If he were behind every evil-provoking thought, we would have to conclude that we could never fall into temptation and sin all the time he was/is away. He does not have unlimited access to hound believers as much and as often as he wants. That, and we must also remember that our flesh is always involved (as verse fourteen confirms), even though Satan may not be. Regardless of whether the Devil is present or not, a temptation is still and will always be a temptation that God expects us to resist. The difficulty level for each one matters little because although some are harder than others, the solution to overcoming them is still the same no matter what.  

It is a great act of mercy and grace for God to disallow the evil one from constantly harassing us. He has other people to tempt and other whereabouts of which we humans are in the dark. But this does not mean we become immune to temptation whenever he is absent. Satan does take advantage of the sinful nature resident within us, but some temptations can originate from this sole source. In other words, our flesh may still feel tempted to do wrong even when the great tempter himself is temporarily away (this can happen through negligence by letting our minds wander too far). Temptation can arise at any time, and sometimes, we feel like giving in, even though we know we shouldn’t and don’t have to. But feelings are irrelevant and can’t force us to do anything we don’t want to do. 

We can’t always control how we feel, just as we can’t always stop certain thoughts and temptations from entering our minds. We can mitigate the likelihood of our minds wandering onto impure things by meditating on God’s truth, but even that won’t stop every bad thought or temptation from “getting in.” Meditation can help brace our minds for impact, but isn’t the same as making a free-will decision to say no (James tells us to resist the Devil **James 4:7**). What we do have control over is how we handle or react to said problems. We need to remember that we have the Holy Spirit living within us to empower our decisions through free will (we have the free will to say no). So, when an impure thought arises, we resist and replace it with a virtuous truth we have believed and stored in our hearts (**Psalm 119:11**). 

It is frequently the case that while God tests us, Satan and our flesh tempt us to give up during the trial so that tests and temptations coincide (an obvious point since we are tempted every day). The Jewish believers in our book not only struggled with their trials but also gave into sin more frequently during those periods than they should have. Like the Gentile Corinthians Paul had to call out in two large letters, these Jewish believers (albeit to a lesser degree) displayed a level of spiritual immaturity that needed correction (James will reprimand them for some of this behavior later in his letter).  

Job’s case is a good example of a man who endured testing and temptation simultaneously. God allowed this hero of the faith to undergo what he did because his faith was the greatest of his generation; hence, it could handle such a tremendous amount of “applied force.” And, yes, that great book tells us that God can use the Devil for His own glorious purposes. God allowed the test not to get Job to give into the temptation to give up and fail (as his wife insinuated that he should **Job 2:9**) but to grow and strengthen his faith. The Devil, on the other hand, while involved in the test by inflicting Job, his family, and possessions, frequently harassed him to give up and give in. What God meant for good, the Devil intended for evil. A similar situation involved Joseph and his brothers in **Genesis 50:20**.   

One point I would like to clarify is that we can view temptations as a test (of sorts). No, it is not a test directly from God (God never entices us to sin against Him because a kingdom cannot be divided against itself **Matthew 12:25-27**). But we can still see it as one because it tests our faith and obedience (or the present state or disposition of our heart). Will we give in or obey? Will we trust God to deliver us through the temptation, no matter how difficult? Temptations still test faith and obedience, and that’s the point. The main difference between the two is, as we’ve already said above, that one originates from the flesh and the Devil desiring to see us commit evil (explaining why God doesn’t tempt us). The other comes from God, wishing our obedience and spiritual well-being (which is why Satan never tests us for those purposes). 

The final half of verse thirteen has the phrase, “*For God cannot be tempted by evil*.” This may sound like a contradiction because Jesus was tempted by Satan in the wilderness (**Matthew 4:1-11**, **Luke 4:1-13**, and **Mark 1:12-13**), “*One who in every respect has been tempted as we are, yet without sin*” **Hebrews 4:15**.

However, there is no contradiction because our Lord was tempted only during His time on earth in His humanity after the incarnation when He took on a not yet resurrected human body that was vulnerable to physical limitations, such as fatigue, hunger, pain, physical death, etc. This was a time when Christ could be tempted due to the limits and restrictions He had because of having to identify Himself with the human race to die and pay for the world’s sins (a doctrine known in theology as “kenosis”). Outside of this period (before the incarnation and after His resurrection), the Lord God has never been tempted (nor will He ever be). The Father foreknew in eternity past that Jesus would live a perfect, sinless life while completing His mission perfectly (**1 Peter 2:22**, **2 Corinthians 5:21**, **1 John 3:5**). Our Savior manifested His qualifications for the task before Him by demonstrating perfect obedience to the Father’s will through His thoughts, words, and actions. 

{{% scripture p="Philippians 2:5-11 (ESV)" %}} 

**5** Have this mind among yourselves, which is yours in Christ Jesus, **6** who, though he was in the form of God, did not count equality with God a thing to be grasped, **7** but emptied himself, by taking the form of a servant, being born in the likeness of men. **8** And being found in human form, he humbled himself by becoming obedient to the point of death, even death on a cross. **9** Therefore God has highly exalted him and bestowed on him the name that is above every name, **10** so that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, in heaven and on earth and under the earth, **11** and every tongue confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.                                                                      

{{% /scripture %}}   

{{% scripture p="Hebrews 2:5-8 (NASB 1995)" %}} 

**5** For He did not subject to angels the world to come, concerning which we are speaking. **6** But one has testified somewhere, saying,“ What is man, that You remember him? Or the son of man, that You are concerned about him? **7** “You have made him for a little while lower than the angels; You have crowned him with glory and honor, And have appointed him over the works of Your hands;
 **8** You have put all things in subjection under his feet.” For in subjecting all things to him, He left nothing that is not subject to him. But now we do not yet see all things subjected to him.                                                               

{{% /scripture %}}   

{{% scripture p="Hebrews 2:9-19 (NASB 1995)" %}} 

**9** But we do see Him who was made for a little while lower than the angels, *namely*, Jesus, because of the suffering of death crowned with glory and honor, so that by the grace of God He might taste death for everyone.**10** For it was fitting for Him, for whom are all things, and through whom are all things, in bringing many sons to glory, to perfect the author of their salvation through sufferings. **11** For both He who sanctifies and those who are sanctified are all from one *Father*; for which reason He is not ashamed to call them brethren, **12** saying, “I will proclaim Your name to My brethren, In the midst of the congregation I will sing Your praise.” **13** And again, “I will put My trust in Him.” And again, “Behold, I and the children whom God has given Me.” **14** Therefore, since the children share in flesh and blood, He Himself likewise also partook of the same, that through death He might render powerless him who had the power of death, that is, the devil, **15** and might free those who through fear of death were subject to slavery all their lives. **16** For assuredly He does not give help to angels, but He gives help to the descendant of Abraham. **17** Therefore, He had to be made like His brethren in all things, so that He might become a merciful and faithful high priest in things pertaining to God, to make propitiation for the sins of the people. **18** For since He Himself was tempted in that which He has suffered, He is able to come to the aid of those who are tempted. 

{{% /scripture %}}  

Jesus was tempted only in His humanity, not in the “God” aspect of Himself (His divinity). God cannot be tempted. Jesus is God (**John 10:30**) but could only be tempted during His time on earth after the virgin birth but before His resurrection while He walked through the world as a physical human being under the restrictions He limited Himself to (kenosis). Only the limited human part of Him was tempted. Despite the limitations of depriving Himself of many of His divine powers and abilities, the hypostatic union remained perfectly intact (Jesus was still both God and man). 

Time and space do not permit a more thorough examination of the theological words “hypostatic union” and “kenosis.” This is not a Christology study but a verse-by-verse teaching through the book of James. So, for the sake of our subject and to keep with the flow of our examination, I have decided to be brief on this topic. The doctrine of *kenosis* refers to the self-imposed limitations of Christ during His time on earth as a physical human being (reasons explained above). The doctrine of the hypostatic union refers to the fact that Jesus has always been God but took on two natures from the incarnation forward. The fact that He became a man forever since then did not, in any way, take away from His divine nature (or from the fact that He was still God). ONLY during His time on earth after the incarnation but before the resurrection did the limitations of kenosis apply. 

Ever since the resurrection, the Lord God has not been subject to temptation because he could only suffer such satanic attacks in His humanity while still on earth before the resurrection. We believers, too, will one day no longer be subject to temptation once we die. The dead in Christ (all believers who died since Adam up to our present time) are untemptable now even as they presently possess an interim body in the third heaven **2 Corinthians 5:1-10**, **Philippians 1:21-26** (soul sleep is unbiblical).  Believers don’t possess Christ’s deity but are dichotomous, having both a human body and spirit. The spirits of our departed brothers and sisters are presently in the third heaven housed in temporary bodies until the resurrection to occur at Christ’s second advent when they will receive their eternal, resurrection bodies **1 Thessalonians 4:13-18**, **Revelation 20:4-6**. As our Thessalonians passage affirms, those still alive at Christ’s return will be resurrected while still physically alive to witness Christ’s second and final return. 

Finally, the word “flesh” does not always have to refer to the sinful nature. Christ did not possess a sinful nature yet was still said to be in the flesh during His stay on earth. The flesh can refer to both the sinful nature and the physical body that presently houses our human spirits. 

## **Verse 14** 

{{% scripture p="James 1:14 (ESV)" %}} 

**14** But each person is tempted when he is lured and enticed by his own desire.                                                                                      

{{% /scripture %}}   

### The origin(s) of temptation 

So, since God tempts no one, how are believers tempted (regardless of whether the temptation comes from internal or external stimuli; our heart or inner self is always involved) and where do temptations come from? Verse fourteen and fifteen answer these questions. The word “but” in our English translation indicates that this verse explains how believers suffer temptation instead of how they do not, as described in verse thirteen (a striking contrast). So, instead of happening in said manner, it occurs another way. Temptation, whether solely from the flesh, the Devil, or both (temptation can come in various ways), is like a lure (think of a fishing lure) meant to get the person to latch on and bite. Now, even if Satan is not involved in the process, a temptation is still a temptation (to be resisted) that is like a lure meant to capture our attention by eliciting a negative response. The luring part of temptation involves setting up the object, thing, or person for capture (drawing them out) by enticing their inner desire to take the offering. The Greek word for enticed is *deleazo" (δελεάζω)* and refers to what we have just said: enticing something by catching it with some kind of bait (whatever the temptation is).

We then have the word desire, which we will now spend a bit of time examining and explaining to help us understand why we believers continue to sin even though we don’t have to. Before starting, allow me to say that this is not a hamartiology study examining the specific subject of sin (the sin nature). Instead, this is a brief but thorough explanation of the question (not meant to be fully comprehensive since there are multiple smaller “sub-reasons” on why we sin).  

Some English translations have the word lust instead of desire at the end of verse fourteen. However, the meaning remains the same because the Greek word for lust is “*epithumia*" (ἐπιθυμία) and has desire included in its meaning. Lust is just another word used to mean desiring something we shouldn’t. Anytime we sin, we do so because we desire to think, speak, or act based on what we really wanted to do at that moment. 

#### **Why do we believers continue to sin**?  

So why do we believers sin even though we don’t have to because there is never an excuse for it? Yes, the sin nature (or flesh) is a big part of the problem and helps to explain much of why we give in to temptation (our fallen nature makes sinless perfection impossible). The evil desires of the sin nature is a big part of the equation.   

So, if the sin nature cannot force anyone to give in and sin, why do we still commit it? How can we explain that we cannot be without sin (**1 John 1:8**) yet never have to give in? The sinful nature is a significant weakness that guarantees failure for every person to various degrees. We are still human, created with the ability to respond to God negatively or positively. So, although Adam and Eve didn’t yet have a sin nature before the fall, they still had free will. They were not untemptable as God has always been (in His eternal divinity), and as our departed brothers and sisters are in the third Heaven now (all of us presently alive will one day share this blessed state when we go home to be with the Lord). We do not lose our free will after death, but, like God, we become untemptable and, therefore, incapable of sinning. 

{{% scripture p="Psalm 78:30-40 (NASB 1995)" %}} 

**30** Before they had satisfied their desire, While their food was in their mouths, **31** The anger of God rose against them And killed some of their stoutest ones, And subdued the choice men of Israel. **32** In spite of all this they still sinned And did not believe in His wonderful works. **33** So He brought their days to an end in futility And their years in sudden terror. **34** When He killed them, then they sought Him, And returned and searched diligently for God; **35** And they remembered that God was their rock, And the Most High God their Redeemer. **36** But they deceived Him with their mouth And lied to Him with their tongue. **37** For their heart was not steadfast toward Him, Nor were they faithful in His covenant. **38** But He, being compassionate, forgave *their* iniquity and did not destroy *them*; And often He restrained His anger And did not arouse all His wrath. **39 Thus He remembered that they were but flesh**, A wind that passes and does not return. **40** How often they rebelled against Him in the wilderness And grieved Him in the desert!          

{{% /scripture %}}      

{{% scripture p="Matthew 26:36-40 (NIV)" %}} 

**36** Then Jesus went with his disciples to a place called Gethsemane, and he said to them, “Sit here while I go over there and pray.” **37** He took Peter and the two sons of Zebedee along with him, and he began to be sorrowful and troubled. **38** Then he said to them, “My soul is overwhelmed with sorrow to the point of death. Stay here and keep watch with me.” **39** Going a little farther, he fell with his face to the ground and prayed, “My Father, if it is possible, may this cup be taken from me. Yet not as I will, but as you will.” **40** Then he returned to his disciples and found them sleeping. “Couldn’t you men keep watch with me for one hour?” he asked Peter. **41** “Watch and pray so that you will not fall into temptation. The spirit is willing, **but the flesh is weak**.”                                                 

{{% /scripture %}}       

The flesh mentioned in our two passages above refers to all the mental, physical, and spiritual limitations human beings (specifically believers in this case) have because of possessing a sinful nature we all inherited from Adam **Genesis 3:19** (sin corrupted flesh can only produce sinfully corrupt offspring). Those limitations and the sin nature that coexists alongside them are meant because they are inseparable. In our Matthew passage above, we can see how they manifested themselves through fatigue when the disciples became tired to the point of sleep and were, thus, vulnerable to giving into temptation (which they eventually did when they abandoned our Lord). 

 The result of sin was the sin nature, which brought about the curse resulting in the physical limitations we humans must labor under (hunger, thirst, fatigue, pain, physical death, etc., all things that will disappear in eternity). This helps to explain why we often desire to give into sin (we have mental, physical, and spiritual limitations because of sin’s curse and the sin nature resident within us). No, Adam and Eve didn’t have any of these weaknesses before they fell. But they still possessed free will and a nature susceptible to temptation. And since they were vulnerable to temptation, the Devil used one of his greatest methods of attack: the lie which he used to deceive Eve (**John 8:44**).  

 To swing back to why believers possessing a sinful nature still sin, the weaknesses we have inherent from birth certainly don’t help and significantly contribute to many of our failures (**Galatians 5:17**). We may **desire** to sin because we are tired or bored and, therefore, don’t feel like resisting to the point of blood in our struggles (**Hebrews 12:4** we may also be unwilling to resist because of the various levels of pain and difficulty involved in so doing). Laziness, complacency, and boredom are all possible reasons out of many possibilities (we could never hope to give a comprehensive list of all the specifics). James will call out some of his Jewish readers for engaging in sinful behavior because of the desires within them (think about how Eve desired to eat the fruit for reasons already stated). Many of the believers James wrote to were reacting to their trials sinfully because they thought God was against them. This was, of course, not true. James addresses this problem in verses fourteen and eighteen and will return to the subject later in his letter.  

{{% scripture p="James 4:1-3 (NASB 1995)" %}} 

 What is the source of quarrels and conflicts among you? **Is not the source your pleasures that wage war in your members**? **2** You lust and do not have; *so* you commit murder. You are envious and cannot obtain; *so* you fight and quarrel. You do not have because you do not ask. **3** You ask and do not receive, because you ask with wrong motives, so that you may spend *it* on your pleasures. 

{{% /scripture %}}       

The Greek word for pleasures in verse one above is *hēdonē* (this is the origin of our English word “hedonism”) and refers to pleasures, passions, and desires (desires is a good and accurate translation). Our free will choices always follow what we truly wanted (desire). If we did something wrong, it is because we **wanted** to do wrong. If we did what was right, it is because we **wanted** to do right. Perhaps we initially had some desire to resist a particular temptation but didn’t follow through. In that case, our desire to obey was not enough because we allowed it to dissolve. Sufficient desire will guarantee victory. But the sinful nature (something our Lord **didn’t** have to contend with during His time on earth before His resurrection) and the inescapability of temptation make sinless perfection impossible. Adam and Eve could have remained perfect because they never had a sinful nature and could have said “no” to Satan’s offer. Satan knew they needed some motivator to give in (hence, the Devil tempted Eve by going for her greatest weaknesses after many years of observing her). 

{{% scripture p="Romans 5:12-19 (NIV)" %}}  

**12** Therefore, just as sin entered the world through one man, and death through sin, and in this way death came to all people, because all sinned—**13** To be sure, sin was in the world before the law was given, but sin is not charged against anyone’s account where there is no law. **14** Nevertheless, death reigned from the time of Adam to the time of Moses, even over those who did not sin by breaking a command, as did Adam, who is a pattern of the one to come.**15** But the gift is not like the trespass. For if the many died by the trespass of the one man, how much more did God’s grace and the gift that came by the grace of the one man, Jesus Christ, overflow to the many! **16** Nor can the gift of God be compared with the result of one man’s sin: The judgment followed one sin and brought condemnation, but the gift followed many trespasses and brought justification. **17** For if, by the trespass of the one man, death reigned through that one man, how much more will those who receive God’s abundant provision of grace and of the gift of righteousness reign in life through the one man, Jesus Christ!**18** Consequently, just as one trespass resulted in condemnation for all people, so also one righteous act resulted in justification and life for all people. **19** For just as through the disobedience of the one man the many were made sinners, so also through the obedience of the one man the many will be made righteous.                                                                 

{{% /scripture %}}       

We may conclude that we still sin **Romans 3:23** (even though we never have to) because our sinful nature ultimately means that we will never always desire (have a willingness) to do the right thing (we gave some more specific example reasons above). In contrast, Adam and Eve could have continued in their perfect state because all the pain, difficulties, struggles, suffering, and inconveniences that came into existence after the fall didn’t exist before that. They didn’t have to labor under the sin nature and the curse that came with it. 

So, our answer includes our vulnerability to temptation, and (with that) the desires of our hearts capable of wanting to sin (evil is the result) due to that vulnerability and the sinful nature (**1 Peter 2:11**). It is impossible to be sinless when all these things are combined. 

However, as already mentioned, other reasons can also be involved (we cannot give a comprehensive list). Whenever we sin, we failed to demonstrate the proper love for the Lord that is due Him (fear is another **Ecclesiastes 12:13**). **John 14:15** says, “*If you love me*, *you will keep my commandments*.”  All believers love the Lord, of course, so sinful behavior doesn’t mean we don’t love God at all (only unbelievers have no true love for Him). But it still holds that our love for Christ will fluctuate and will never be perfect. The more we sin, the less love we demonstrate toward our Master. But greater love will manifest itself positively (less sin).  

Unbelievers, on the other hand, cannot resist sin at all because they do not have God’s strength operating in their lives. They still live in their sins and, thus, have no genuine desire to master their inner desires because they are enslaved to them (**Romans 6:6-7**). The solution, of course, is to believe in the Lord Jesus Christ for salvation (**Acts 16:31**) by taking advantage of God’s offer and solution to the problem of sin and death. 

Before we finish, it is necessary to point out that it is best to focus on the solution to sin and not the struggle (problem) itself. We don’t need to get our minds wrapped up over the specifics of the many causes and reasons for sinful behavior other than briefly examining some of the bigger and more obvious ones (and even there, our focus still needs to be on the solution and not the problem). I needed to explain things here because **James 1:14** involves and describes one of these more significant and obvious reasons. So, it was necessary to spell things out to a certain degree (even if our focus shouldn’t be on that issue once it is more thoroughly understood).   

Finally, as a motivation and inspiration for us to give our best (the Lord wants our very best even though we can never be perfect), we have the ultimate example in our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ, who desired to do the Father’s will. We, too, should strive to please our Master as much as possible. We can’t overcome any temptation if we don’t genuinely want to. The passage below, written by David and quoted in **Hebrews 10:5-8** also applies to the Messiah who desired (delighted) to do the Father’s will. Let’s also show enthusiasm to do the same in our resolve to resist sin.  

{{% scripture p="Psalm 40:6-8 (NIV)" %}}  

**6** Sacrifice and offering you did not desire— but my ears you have opened— burnt offerings and sin offerings you did not require. **7** Then I said, “Here I am, I have come—it is written about me in the scroll. **8** I desire to do your will, my God; your law is within my heart.”                                                            

{{% /scripture %}}   

{{% scripture p="Hebrews 12:1-3 (NASB 1995)" %}}  

Therefore, since we have so great a cloud of witnesses surrounding us, let us also lay aside every encumbrance and the sin which so easily entangles us, and let us run with endurance the race that is set before us, **2** fixing our eyes on Jesus, the author and perfecter of faith, who for the joy set before Him endured the cross, despising the shame, and has sat down at the right hand of the throne of God.**3** For consider Him who has endured such hostility by sinners against Himself, so that you will not grow weary and lose heart.        

{{% /scripture %}}   

## **Verse 15**                                             

{{% scripture p="James 1:15 (ESV)" %}}  

**15** Then desire when it has conceived gives birth to sin, and sin when it is fully grown brings forth death.                                                                               

{{% /scripture %}}   

### The results of desire and the sin it produces 

Verse fifteen continues explaining the process of sin and how it occurs and worsens with time if let out of control. The word desire (to desire, crave, or long for) appears again, along with the word conceived (*sullambano* means to take or seize), which refers to said person giving in to the temptation (fully committing oneself to it by taking the bait). The result of this action is sin, and sin, if allowed to grow to full maturity (leading to apostasy), leads to eternal death. The Greek word for fully grown is *apoteleō ἀποτελέω* and means to perfect or accomplish (some English translations rightly use the word “accomplished” instead of “fully grown” because the meanings are the same). 

This verse describes the process of spiritual degeneration or decline in that the believer continues to feed their sinful desires to the death of their faith, a process known as apostasy. James is writing to believers and describes a process that can only apply to Christians for that reason. The phrase “*And sin when it is fully grown brings forth death*” represents an individual involved in a pattern that leads to a negative outcome if allowed to continue. Unbelievers cannot experience this because they are still in their sins and already spiritually dead. Our verse involves a person sliding from a better position (one no unbeliever ever had to begin with) to a worse one. 

{{% scripture p="Hebrews 3:13-19 (ESV)" %}} 

**12** Take care, brothers, lest there be in any of you an evil, unbelieving heart, leading you to fall away from the living God. **13** But exhort one another every day, as long as it is called “today,” that none of you may be hardened by the deceitfulness of sin. **14** For we have come to share in Christ, if indeed we hold our original confidence firm to the end. **15** As it is said, “*Today*, *if you hear his voice*, *do not harden your hearts as in the rebellion*.”**16** For who were those who heard and yet rebelled? Was it not all those who left Egypt led by Moses? **17** And with whom was he provoked for forty years? Was it not with those who sinned, whose bodies fell in the wilderness? **18** And to whom did he swear that they would not enter his rest, but to those who were disobedient? **19** So we see that they were unable to enter because of unbelief.                              

{{% /scripture %}}    

Additionally, the words “accomplished” and “fully grown” further reinforce the truth that spiritual and eternal death are meant, not physical death as some form of discipline for the believer. The result of this process is already accomplished in that said person has gone the whole way by giving their life over to sin so that they no longer care about their present conduct. Those who practice sin are unbelievers and will not inherit the kingdom of Heaven. 

{{% scripture p="Galatians 5:19-21 (NIV)" %}} 

**19** The acts of the flesh are obvious: sexual immorality, impurity and debauchery; **20** idolatry and witchcraft; hatred, discord, jealousy, fits of rage, selfish ambition, dissensions, factions **21** and envy; drunkenness, orgies, and the like. **I warn you**, **as I did before**, that those who live like this will not inherit the kingdom of God.                                                                            

{{% /scripture %}}  

#### **How sin contributes to apostasy** 

We have already examined the subject of apostasy and how it occurs elsewhere throughout this ministry. However, we will briefly revisit and explain it to help us understand this verse. Firstly, yes, believers can stop following and, thus, believing in Jesus Christ for multiple reasons. Salvation is conditional upon continuous faith (by faith through grace alone we are saved **Ephesians 2:8-9**). Faith is not a work; therefore, holding fast to it does not constitute working our way to Heaven through our own efforts (salvation is not by works). 

The process of continued belief also isn’t automatic because the parable of the soils confirms that some do believe but fall away later on. 

{{% scripture p="Luke 8:9-15 (ESV)" %}} 

**9** And when his disciples asked him what this parable meant, **10** he said, “To you it has been given to know the secrets of the kingdom of God, but for others they are in parables, so that ‘seeing they may not see, and hearing they may not understand.’ **11** Now the parable is this: The seed is the word of God. **12** The ones along the path are those who have heard; then the devil comes and takes away the word from their hearts, so that they may not believe and be saved. **13** And the ones on the rock are those who, when they hear the word, receive it with joy. But these have no root; they believe for a while, and in time of testing fall away. **14** And as for what fell among the thorns, they are those who hear, but as they go on their way they are choked by the cares and riches and pleasures of life, and their fruit does not mature. **15** As for that in the good soil, they are those who, hearing the word, hold it fast in an honest and good heart, and bear fruit with patience.                        

{{% /scripture %}}  

The meaning of the above passage and **Hebrews 3:13-19** are clear. Some **believe for a while** but **fall away** in time of **testing**. God tests believers with faith that can be tested (unbelievers possess nothing that allows testing). Likewise, what is the point of Paul warning his readers (and us today to whom these words also apply) against the dangers of sin-involved apostasy in **Galatians 5:19-21** and **Hebrews 3:13-19** if there was no possibility they could ever do such a thing? But he gave these warnings to everyone because we can indeed take such a path if we **desire** and choose. James did the same thing here more indirectly to discourage his reading audience from negatively reacting to their trials through sinful behavior. Sin can lead to more sin and hardening of the heart if taken too far (a danger James wanted to steer these Jewish believers away from). 

So, how can sin contribute to apostasy (the complete death of one’s faith)? Again, we have already described this process elsewhere. And, to repeat, sin does not have to be an involved contributor for a believer to abandon their faith entirely (there can be multiple reasons for that involving many possibilities, so giving a comprehensive list is unrealistic). However, when sin is involved, it can’t help but eat away at our faith by hardening our hearts toward God if continued. If said person pursues it to the fullest (it becomes “accomplished” in their life), it means that said pattern has forced them to make a free will choice between Christ and their new “idol.” If they choose the latter, the individual has chosen to stop believing (following) in Christ because sin has hardened their hearts so much to a point where they no longer wish to have any affiliation with God.  

Faith can't survive if sin is allowed to grow to full maturity (the person begins practicing it without worry or care **Galatians 5:21**) because a person can only harden their heart so much until the process forces them to defect from God entirely. Any believer can reverse this process with God’s help, but only with true repentance. Without the desire to reverse course (assuming the Lord’s divine disciplining of them doesn’t work **Hebrews 12:3-11**), there can be no solution to the problem if said individual genuinely wishes to go off the “deep end.” 

{{% scripture p="Hebrews 3:12-13 (ESV)" %}} 

**12 Take care**, brothers, lest there be in any of you **an evil**, **unbelieving heart**, **leading you to fall away from the living God**. **13** But exhort one another every day, as long as it is called “today,” that none of you may be **hardened by the deceitfulness of sin**.                                                             

{{% /scripture %}}  

#### **Struggling with sin versus practicing it** 

With all the above said (and on a more positive note), there is a difference between struggling with sin and practicing it. Believers can struggle heavily with sin for a long time before learning to suppress it consistently. However, the difference between a believer and an unbeliever is that one cares while the other does not. If one is a believer, that person is saved (**John 3:16-18**), a point that brings us back to the subject of “desire.” One of the bigger and more obvious reasons we believers continue to sin is because we don’t always desire to do the right thing (a point we’ve already thoroughly covered). There can be various reasons why we may be unwilling to resist any temptation (although a desire to disobey is always involved). However, we must point out that all believers care about their lifestyles to some extent. There is no such thing as a brother or sister in Christ who doesn’t care about sin to some level because if there were no concern, said person would have to be an unbeliever. 

The more persistently we sin, the less desire we have demonstrated to overcome it. The less we sin, the greater our desire or willingness is to beat it. It is all a matter of degrees, so we will always be in flux. All believers have this desire to obey to some degree as long as they are believers. However, if backsliding continues to occur, it is because the level of care and willingness has shrunk. And, of course, if continued, that process can become fully accomplished if said pattern advances to apostasy and, thus, spiritual death **James 1:15**). 

If we are getting better at resisting temptation (the Devil and the inclinations of our flesh), then that is a sign that our desire to please the Lord is consistently growing, even though we will never be perfect. It is safe to say we sin every day, so even mature, advancing believers still fall far short of perfection. Some may fall into unrepentant sin for a while (it continues to worsen) until they either hit rock bottom and repent or continue sinning to the death of their faith. But we should remember that some believers may be stuck (addicted to various degrees) because they aren’t dramatically moving forward or backward (they are inconsistent) and may remain in said state for an extended period (even years) until they better learn to apply the truth in their lives. None of that is excusable (we must always be deadly serious about sin and should never take it lightly). But it is understandable since even believers are imperfect human beings living in an imperfect world.  

The process of getting out of chronic sin can be challenging (depending on how deep a person has gotten into said behavior), so it can take a lot of time, pain, and practice until overt, positive transformation begins to manifest itself. The more serious we become, the better we get as we go along. But just because no major change has occurred does not mean we aren’t on our way. So, although we may only experience a slight improvement initially, persistence will accelerate into more pronounced progress. 

So, just because we’ve mustered greater care and concern over the sin in our lives (sin we have come to hate and detest even more) doesn’t mean significant results will occur overnight. How quickly we advance can depend on how predisposed we are toward certain destructive behaviors (not to mention our history and track record with said issue) and the willingness to suffer on the path to victorious glory (suffering is the path to glory). The more we want or desire to improve, the faster and farther we will go.  

Some believers grow out of sinful habits much more quickly than others, which may take longer (times that vary). But we all struggle with different and various things and must accept that we will never be perfect as long as we are alive on this earth in these sin-infested bodies (even if we have gotten better at dealing with sin in general). There is no specific level of self-control on some scale to indicate whether we have overcome said struggle, which is not a good way to think about the problem. Ultimately, our focus should always be on getting better. If we are improving and maintaining said momentum, that should give us peace of mind. That doesn’t mean we won’t have momentary or even occasional, periodic lapses where we may worsen for a brief time. But it does mean positive consistency continuously characterizes our walk. 

Additionally, we must remember that just because we may have struggled badly in one area doesn’t mean we weren’t growing spiritually in general. Sin doesn’t help and slows our growth and production but doesn’t necessarily indicate no growth in other areas. But the more we give in to it, the harder it becomes to resist. The focus should always be on the solution, not the problem itself (which includes forgetting and moving on from past failures (**Philippians 3:13-14**). But this does not mean we ignore that sin has consequences, whether spiritual, mental, physical, or a combination of two or all three. 

{{% scripture p="Hebrews 12:1-2 (NASB 1995)" %}} 

Therefore, since we have so great a cloud of witnesses surrounding us, let us also lay aside every encumbrance and the sin which so easily entangles us, and let us run with endurance the race that is set before us, **2** fixing our eyes on Jesus, the author and perfecter of faith, who for the joy set before Him endured the cross, despising the shame, and has sat down at the right hand of the throne of God.                    

{{% /scripture %}}  

## **Verses 16-18**

{{% scripture p="James 1:16-18 (ESV)" %}} 

**16** Do not be deceived, my beloved brothers. **17** Every good gift and every perfect gift is from above, coming down from the Father of lights, with whom there is no variation or shadow due to change. **18** Of his own will he brought us forth by the word of truth, that we should be a kind of firstfruits of his creatures.                                                      

{{% /scripture %}}  

### Every good and every perfect gift comes from above 

James uses the words, “*Do not be deceived*,” in **verse sixteen** to correct some of his Jewish readers who thought God was tempting them to sin through the trials He allowed them to go through. But, as James already explained, God does not tempt anyone. So these believers should not have thought that there were any evil intentions and motivations behind God’s plans. Instead, what some of them saw as negatives, they should have seen as positives (causes of rejoicing **James 1:2**) because the Lord had their very best interest at heart (the Lord doesn’t want us to sin and will help us overcome the temptations to do so). The irony in this was that Satan was tempting these believers to believe God was tempting them! If they fell for this lie, they would have become dissuaded from enduring what was necessary for them to grow. James knew this couldn’t happen and evidenced his strong concern for them even more by calling them beloved brothers. These were James’s brothers and sisters in Christ, ones under his care and charge, which made his love for them more personal, intimate, and affectionate.  

**Verse seventeen** in our English translation reads, “*Every good gift and every perfect gift is from above*, *coming down from the Father of Lights*, *with whom there is no variation or shadow due to change*.” Again, we need only reflect on everything we’ve examined in our present context to understand what this means. Temptations to sin don’t come from God, so whatever comes from Him is good and for our betterment. Everything God sends our way (these can be a variety of things) the Lord uses to help, not hinder us. The gospels provide a few good examples of this principle. The context in our Luke passage below does mention the specific giving of the Holy Spirit, but the principle of everything coming from God being good is present in that passage (as well as the others). So, although we may not ask God to put us through a particular and challenging trial, we can be assured that everything from Him is always good because He wants nothing but the best for us. If we ask for strength to endure through a test, will the Lord not grant us deliverance if we would but wait on Him in complete faith? 

{{% scripture p="Matthew 7:7-11 (ESV)" %}} 

**7** “Ask, and it will be given to you; seek, and you will find; knock, and it will be opened to you. **8** For everyone who asks receives, and the one who seeks finds, and to the one who knocks it will be opened. **9** Or which one of you, if his son asks him for bread, will give him a stone? **10** Or if he asks for a fish, will give him a serpent? **11** If you then, who are evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your Father who is in heaven give good things to those who ask him!                                                                                  

{{% /scripture %}}  

{{% scripture p="Luke 11:5-15 (ESV)" %}} 

**5** And he said to them, “Which of you who has a friend will go to him at midnight and say to him, ‘Friend, lend me three loaves, **6** for a friend of mine has arrived on a journey, and I have nothing to set before him’; **7** and he will answer from within, ‘Do not bother me; the door is now shut, and my children are with me in bed. I cannot get up and give you anything’? **8** I tell you, though he will not get up and give him anything because he is his friend, yet because of his impudence he will rise and give him whatever he needs. **9** And I tell you, ask, and it will be given to you; seek, and you will find; knock, and it will be opened to you. **10** For everyone who asks receives, and the one who seeks finds, and to the one who knocks it will be opened. **11** What father among you, if his son asks for a fish, will instead of a fish give him a serpent; **12** or if he asks for an egg, will give him a scorpion? **13** If you then, who are evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will the heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to those who ask him!”                                                   

{{% /scripture %}}  

So, what about not receiving the things we asked for? Does that mean that God withheld something from us that we needed? Did He intend to harm or damage us by doing so? The answer is an absolute no! We may have to wait a long time before receiving what we prayed for, or it was never in the Lord’s will for us to have (and for the better!). **1 John 5:14-15** reads, “**14** *This is the confidence we have in approaching God: that if we ask anything **according to his will**, he hears us.* ***15** And if we know that he hears us—whatever we ask—we know that we have what we asked of him*. The condition to receive what we desire is based on whether it’s in the Lord’s will for us to have (see **James 4:13-17**). That also includes praying with the right motives, something James will address later in his letter in **James 4:1-6**. 

The second phrase in our verse, “*coming down from the Father of lights*,” highlights the fact that only good things can come from God because there is no darkness in Him at all. **1 John 1:5-7** says, “**5** *This is the message we have heard from Him and announce to you, that God is Light, and in Him there is no darkness at all.* ***6** If we say that we have fellowship with Him and yet walk in the darkness, we lie and do not practice the truth; **7** but if we walk in the Light as He Himself is in the Light, we have fellowship with one another, and the blood of Jesus His Son cleanses us from all sin.* So, whenever we are tempted to sin and give in to it, we cannot blame God for our failures or for being against us by trying to get us to fail. 

The final phrase in our verse reads, “*With whom there is no variation or shadow due to change*.” God never changes in His nature or character, etc., and He deals with us perfectly, just as much during difficult times (trials or tribulations) as at all times. He never changes at ALL in any sense of the word (unlike a shifting shadow that changes in shape, size, or form)! He is the same yesterday, today, and forever (**Hebrews 13:8**). His behavior toward humanity is not varied in that He’s good one moment but then evil another. God always remains His perfect self, no matter the circumstances, whether good or bad. That should give us comfort, indeed! 

In regards to **verse eighteen**, James needed to mention these words because why would a loving God tempt anyone (those He loved and died for, both believer and unbeliever), especially believers with a special relationship with Him? The trials God allows in our lives are things we should never view as temptations (and, therefore, causes to sin) because the Lord tempts no one. If God loves us, how can we ever credit Him with such actions? God tests us for our betterment because all good things come from Him. Therefore, the Lord was not tempting these believers by allowing them to endure their challenges.  

Christ did not have to create us or die on the cross to pay for our sins. But He did so because He loved the world (**John 3:16**) and desired that all should come to repentance **2 Peter 3:9**. We could only be saved because of God’s love and desire to reach out to us by paying the penalty of our sins (covering them as in atonement). Without the birth, death, burial, resurrection, ascension, and session of our Savior, salvation would not have been possible. Those who have accepted God’s gift of eternal life constitute the elect or those whom God foreknew in eternity past would come to Him in faith. 

James’s readers were believers, so the verse has only justified saints in view. So, although Christ died for all (**1 John 2:2**), only believers can truly benefit from salvation. Our verse has spiritual rebirth in mind (a rebirth empowered and realized through Christ’s sacrifice on the cross). And, of course, God willing our salvation in no way takes away our free will but empowers it (we couldn’t choose to be saved if God didn’t want us to be). That is why free will and predestination go hand in hand; you cannot have one without the other. When we choose to put our faith and trust in Christ, the Lord honors that choice by saving (justifying), sanctifying, and glorifying us after we have done so. Of course, all those crucial processes only remain true for believers (those who remain believers to the very end). 

God chose to enable our salvation and spiritual rebirth and grants it to all who desire and, thus, willingly receive it. We only love the Lord because He loved us first by redeeming and reconciling us to Himself.  

“*He brought us forth by the word of truth*” refers to Christ saving us believers through His power and the water of the Word of God (the gospel message we accept and believe in our hearts and NOT water baptism; see passage below). Our reception of the gospel results in our spiritual rebirth. 

{{% scripture p="John 3:1-8 (ESV)" %}} 

Now there was a man of the Pharisees named Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews. **2** This man came to Jesus by night and said to him, “Rabbi, we know that you are a teacher come from God, for no one can do these signs that you do unless God is with him.” **3** Jesus answered him, “Truly, truly, I say to you, unless one is born again he cannot see the kingdom of God.” **4** Nicodemus said to him, “How can a man be born when he is old? Can he enter a second time into his mother's womb and be born?” **5** Jesus answered, “Truly, truly, I say to you, unless one is born of water and the Spirit, he cannot enter the kingdom of God. **6** That which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the Spirit is spirit. **7** Do not marvel that I said to you, ‘You must be born again.’ **8** The wind blows where it wishes, and you hear its sound, but you do not know where it comes from or where it goes. So it is with everyone who is born of the Spirit.”                                                     

{{% /scripture %}}   

Regarding the word “firstfruits,” believers are God’s firstfruits in that they have a relationship with Christ (unlike unbelievers). We belong to God (we have a special status with Him as those loved in a more personal way **Revelation 3:19**) just as all the firstfruits of the harvest in Old Testament times belonged to Him (**Leviticus 23:10**). God created all living things (both man and beast) and loves all men, unbelievers included (**John 3:16**, **1 John 4:8**). However, only believers belong to Him. 



**References** 

All Greek words and definitions were taken from Bible Academy using Curtis Omo's lessons through the book of James. Prior permission for this was given to me by Curtis who clarified no need for citing him.  

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-NHHaXVo0uc&t=327s 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iRwcpH0m3tw  