---
title: James 1:12 Lesson 3
weight: 400
summary: The three crowns of reward. 
---

## **The Crown of Life** 

{{% scripture p="James 1:12 (ESV)" %}}

**12** Blessed is the man who remains steadfast under trial, for when he has stood the test he will receive the crown of life, which God has promised to those who love him.         

{{% /scripture %}}   

### **Verse 12** 

{{% scripture p="James 1:12 (ESV)" %}}      

**12** Blessed is the man who remains steadfast under trial, for when he has stood the test he will receive the crown of life, which God has promised to those who love him.       

{{% /scripture %}}   

Verse twelve does not conclude how to view and endure trials through faith working itself out in loving obedience (that theme continues to the end of the book). Verse thirteen implies that some of the Jewish believers in our context confused God’s testing of them (trials of various kinds) with direct temptations from the Devil, a subject to discuss in our next verse. James is a book about how to view and react to hard times, a theme that includes walking in wisdom to live the Christian life during times of duress and all times in general (this also includes being doers of the Word; faith without works is dead **James 2:14-26**). Much like the wisdom teachings of Proverbs, it contains many ethical teachings to be followed by all believers throughout their lives, not just during challenging stages. 

As mentioned in our last lesson, verse twelve involves the method of reward motivation that the writers of Scripture (under the guidance and inspiration of the Holy Spirit) often used to motivate their audiences to give their very best spiritual efforts to obtain the goal they were/are after. So, James briefly pauses the flow of his writing to insert an essential truth that if his readers did x, y would result. Isn’t that a fantastic thing to contemplate? Yes, and it would be fully realized if his readers endured their trials. This principle goes for all believers of all time, including us today! 

The Greek word for blessed in verse twelve is *makarios* and means happy or blessed (the same word for blessed we find in the beatitudes in the sermon on the mount in **Matthew 5:3-11**). How happy is (or will be) the believer who passes the tests meant to grow their faith and bring them closer to the Lord! The result of such conduct is the crown of life, which we will explain in a moment. The word “man” includes both men and women, while “steadfast” refers to enduring or bearing through something patiently to the end. 

With that in mind, it is critical to remember that being imperfect beings that we are, no believer passes every test that comes their way. We will fail some tests occasionally (just as we still sin after salvation). But that no longer means being eligible for this crown of reward. If all Christians had to pass every test to win this crown, then we would all have to be perfect, a state that not even the most mature can or have ever attained. This passage refers to those believers who consistently make it their practice to endure the tests from God that come upon them to grow their faith. But getting to said state requires prior spiritual growth. 

Before explaining the crown of life, we first need to examine the one that comes before it, the crown of righteousness (to be explained further below). No believer can undergo consistent, serious testing without having grown spiritually to some level because without prior growth, said faith would not be ready or able to handle the greater pressure that a stronger faith warrants. This scenario is like what we have with the Jewish believers in our context. They had grown to spiritual maturity to some extent previously when they were in direct contact with James and some of their other leaders. They benefited from their teaching and were able to grow to basic spiritual maturity. However, once they scattered into different parts of the eastern Mediterranean world because of persecution, many began to falter once the pressure was on (hence, one of the main reasons James needed to write them this letter).  

This scenario is similar to what will occur during the Tribulation for all believers destined to see those terrible days (the church will go through the Tribulation). Like the situation we have in our present context, the body of Christ will find itself in a time when good Bible teaching will be rare and hard to come by (even though it already mostly is in our present day of lukewarm Laodicea). The Jewish believers in our context lacked good, solid Bible teaching but were expected to put everything they had learned previously into practice to persevere through the challenges they faced (much of what James wrote to them was probably by way of reminding them again of what they already knew; how much of what they had already been taught is not entirely known). 

The present era of the church (Laodicea) will also have to do the same, except under far worse circumstances than ever in earth’s history. Sadly, most churches and the pastors that lead them are not fulfilling the Lord's intended purpose: to teach the truth of God’s Word seriously and in-depth. Therefore, little growth occurs when proper spiritual nutrition is lacking. The result of this lukewarm attitude (**Revelation 3:14-22**) will be most believers (they and their leaders are both at fault) entering the Tribulation mostly unprepared, despite the majority who will get their acts together and endure through it with faith intact. 

The Tribulation will be a time when believers will have fewer opportunities to build up their faith through storing the truth in their hearts because Bible teaching will be rarer than ever before. Most, if not all, churches will be shut down or “grafted” (compromised) into the beast's new one-world religion so that all those genuinely committed to staying faithful to Christ will have to flee said organizations for their own spiritual safety. 

Despite all this, there will undoubtedly be some opportunities for private gathering and ministry (although the persecution, torture, imprisonment, and martyrdom to occur in the second half of the Tribulation during the great persecution will significantly limit these activities **Revelation 13:10**). Believers during that time will, like those in the book of James, find themselves scattered and persecuted. We would all do well to take note of these teachings by learning, believing, and applying them. We, too, must know how to view and endure difficult trials and tribulations now to be better equipped to survive the greatest of all tribulations to come (trials and tribulations both test our faith so that there is no need to analyze the differences between them because they are all but the same in regard to being testing opportunities for us to grow spiritually). This time will be a period like no other, unequaled from the beginning (**Matthew 24:21-22**). It won’t be a time for building up faith as much as it will be a period of holding fast and clinging to it. That is why we must always prepare (**Jude 1:20-25**), especially in advance! That is not to say those who find themselves mostly unready won’t be able to make a quick turnaround change (most believers during that time will, after all); any believer can and will be able to do so as long as they are still alive and breathing (as long as it is still called today **Hebrews 3:13** as a parallel example). 

The Jewish believers in our book no longer had their “drill sergeants” (as a very loose analogy for pastor-teachers) alongside them on the battlefield to help further guide and teach them. They were now on their own (albeit the book of James was one out of possibly a few exceptions of teaching(s) they did receive) and had to apply the truth they had previously stored in their hearts through the teaching(s) they received earlier. 

While not the best comparison, our military drill sergeant analogy is roughly similar enough to help clarify the point. Technically, the moment a person gets saved is when they enter the battlefield (they are now on Satan’s radar and open to attack). However, we can compare initial spiritual growth to more “basic training” when contrasted with the more difficult period of testing resulting from having already grown up in one’s faith enough for it to handle more intense pressure. 

However, unlike in military combat, where survival is not guaranteed no matter how much said soldier might want to live (just because you don’t want to die doesn’t mean you won’t), any believer can pass any test of their faith if they genuinely want to. Desire, combined with faith in God’s strength (instead of our own), resulting in obedience, will bring about victory.  

We also need to remember that there is a difference between a believer enduring through a particular trial or Tribulation and persevering in his or her faith until the end of their life (this latter part is the meaning of **Matthew 24:13**). So, just because a believer fails a test here and there doesn’t mean salvation won’t result. On the contrary, salvation is guaranteed for all those who exit this world with faith intact (they die as believers and not unbelievers), regardless of how many tests they passed in proportion to how many they failed. Technically, life, in general, is one big test. Still, there are many trials and tribulations (in general) to endure along the way, and we imperfect human beings won’t pass every single one. But they are necessary to grow and strengthen our faith to ensure it “stays alive” for the full duration of our lives.  

{{% scripture p="Acts 14:19-22 (ESV)" %}}     

**19** But Jews came from Antioch and Iconium, and having persuaded the crowds, they stoned Paul and dragged him out of the city, supposing that he was dead. **20** But when the disciples gathered about him, he rose up and entered the city, and on the next day he went on with Barnabas to Derbe. **21** When they had preached the gospel to that city and had made many disciples, they returned to Lystra and to Iconium and to Antioch, **22** strengthening the souls of the disciples, encouraging them to continue in the faith, and saying that **through many tribulations we must enter the kingdom of God**.                                                                     

{{% /scripture %}}    

Finally, before we explain the various crowns of reward (they are actual, literal crowns that correspond to the spiritual level we attained in life), passing a test (of whatever kind, duration, or difficulty) matters more than “how well” we endured it. Yes, we want to say we gave our very best after having persevered through a challenging trial (God wants our best and nothing less). We can’t be perfect but should strive for that goal anyway. But we might think we could have done much better despite passing. That is entirely understandable, considering what I’ve just said. However, the takeaway is that all that matters is that we passed. That, in and of itself, should be a cause of rejoicing. So, if we feel we were sloppy in our approach despite making it through, we need to forget what lies behind (**Philippians 3:12-16**) and resolve to do better the next time. With that, we will now explain the three crowns of reward, beginning with the crown of righteousness. 

### **The Crown of Righteousness- 2 Timothy 4:8**

{{% scripture p="2 Timothy 4:8 (ESV)" %}}    

In the presence of God and of Christ Jesus, who will judge the living and the dead, and in view of his appearing and his kingdom, I give you this charge: **2** Preach the word; be prepared in season and out of season; correct, rebuke and encourage—with great patience and careful instruction. **3** For the time will come when people will not put up with sound doctrine. Instead, to suit their own desires, they will gather around them a great number of teachers to say what their itching ears want to hear. **4** They will turn their ears away from the truth and turn aside to myths. **5** But you, keep your head in all situations, endure hardship, do the work of an evangelist, discharge all the duties of your ministry.**6** For I am already being poured out like a drink offering, and the time for my departure is near. **7** I have fought the good fight, I have finished the race, I have kept the faith. **8 Now there is in store for me the crown of righteousness**, which the Lord, the righteous Judge, will award to me on that day—and not only to me, but also to all who have longed for his appearing.                                                                               

{{% /scripture %}}    

The Greek word for “crown” in **2 Timothy 4:8**, **James 1:12**, and **1 Peter 5:4** is Στέφανος" Stephanos and refers to a wreath or garland awarded to a victor or winner in a public sporting event (the ancient Greek games are one good example). The name “Steven” (such as the Steven we see martyred in **Acts 7:54-60**) derives from this word. All three crowns of reward mentioned in Scripture are for believers exclusively (those who have put their faith and trust in Jesus Christ **Acts 16:31**). 

Every believer who endures in their faith till death will receive eternal life and all other rewards for every good and legitimate thing they did for Christ and His church while still alive. It’s impossible for any faithful believer (those who hold to their faith till death) not to have produced anything because faith without works is dead **James 2:14-26**. Everyone will have something to show for their time on earth when they stand before Christ at the Bema seat during the Millennium (the judgment and reward of the church takes place at the beginning of Christ’s thousand-year reign). The passage below demonstrates this exceptionally well. 

{{% scripture p="Matthew 10:40-42 (ESV)" %}}    

**40** “Whoever receives you receives me, and whoever receives me receives him who sent me. **41** The one who receives a prophet because he is a prophet will receive a prophet's reward, and the one who receives a righteous person because he is a righteous person will receive a righteous person's reward. **42** And whoever gives one of these little ones even a cup of cold water because he is a disciple, truly, I say to you, he will by no means lose his reward.”                                          

{{% /scripture %}}     

Yes, the Bible teaches that there are various types and levels of eternal rewards and that not all believers will receive the same amount or kind in rank (or hierarchy) and honor. This truth is one some find difficult to accept but should be no cause of concern because rewards exist to motivate us to greater spiritual growth, progress, and production. They can act as a slight guard against spiritual laziness and complacency by inspiring us to double down on our spiritual efforts. All the ministry or spiritual service we engage in involves helping other believers by furthering their own spiritual momentum through the use of our spiritual gifts. So, instead of competing against each other (we aren’t racing against our fellow brothers and sisters), we are, as the passage below shows, actually helping them win greater rewards for themselves (Dr. Luginbill).

{{% scripture p="Ephesians 4:11-18 (NASB 1995)" %}}   

**11** And He gave some *as* apostles, and some *as* prophets, and some *as* evangelists, and some *as* pastors and teachers, **12** for the equipping of the saints for the work of service, to the building up of the body of Christ; **13** until we all attain to the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, to a mature man, to the measure of the stature which belongs to the fullness of Christ. **14** As a result, we are no longer to be children, tossed here and there by waves and carried about by every wind of doctrine, by the trickery of men, by craftiness in deceitful scheming; **15** but speaking the truth in love, we are to grow up in all *aspects* into Him who is the head, *even* Christ, **16** from whom the whole body, being fitted and held together by what every joint supplies, according to the proper working of each individual part, causes the growth of the body for the building up of itself in love.                                                                           

{{% /scripture %}}     

There are no limits to what believers can “accomplish” for Christ and His church because the only ones that exist are the ones we put on ourselves (Dr. Luginbill). There is no unfairness in any of this because God does not set up specific individuals for greater reward while automatically “demoting” (if that is the word to use) some to a lower rank or status in the kingdom. As mentioned in our earlier lessons and throughout this ministry, our rewards and rank in eternity will all depend on how well we did (produced) with what we received (in proportion to what we had) **Luke 21:1-4**. Those who go the farthest did so because they had the best disposition of heart toward God. 

Moses, Elijah, Ruth, Esther, David, Paul, and all the other great believers of Scripture (there are far more mentioned and not mentioned in the Bible and throughout church history) were all notable because of how well they chose to respond to the Lord (by their own free will). God didn’t arbitrarily force them to do what He wanted. Instead, He knew in eternity past through divine foreknowledge the hearts of all those who would respond with the greatest love and zeal. Therefore, in that sense, God chose them to be some of His most effective instruments in furthering His plan and will for the church. He selected them because He knew how well they would respond to Him. This principle is most pronounced in God’s selection of King David in **1 Samuel 16:1-7** (**God** **looks at the heart**).   

God would never limit any believer according to their intellectual abilities, education, race, social or economic status, all circumstances, etc. All believers have the chance and opportunities to receive all three crowns of eternal rewards and many others. Maximum spiritual growth, progress, and production empower all of this, and those who choose to engage in all three as aggressively as they can are in for some of the highest rewards in eternity.  

Before we finish examining the crown of righteousness, we need to remember an essential principle that all the glory for everything we do in life (all the fruit we produce that results in eternal rewards) goes to God alone and not ourselves. In that sense, there are no “accomplishments” from any of us because there is nothing in this life we could have done absent God’s strength through the power of His Spirit. Apart from Christ, we can do nothing. We must keep this important principle in mind as we move forward because getting this wrong can lead to pride and robbing God of His glory. Sanctification is God’s work, which we participate in through faith and obedience.  

{{% scripture p="Philippians 2:12-13 (ESV)" %}}   

**12** Therefore, my beloved, **as you have always obeyed**, so now, not only as in my presence but much more in my absence, work out your own salvation with fear and trembling, **13 for it is God who works in you**, both to will and to work for his good pleasure.                                                                     

{{% /scripture %}}    

{{% scripture p="Luke 17:7-10 (NASB 1995)" %}}  

**7** “Which of you, having a slave plowing or tending sheep, will say to him when he has come in from the field, ‘Come immediately and sit down to eat’? **8** But will he not say to him, ‘Prepare something for me to eat, and *properly* clothe yourself and serve me while I eat and drink; and afterward you may eat and drink’? **9** He does not thank the slave because he did the things which were commanded, does he? **10** So you too, when you do all the things which are commanded you, say, ‘We are unworthy slaves; **we have done only that which we ought to have done**.’”                              

{{% /scripture %}}     

{{% scripture p="John 15:1-11 (NASB 1995)" %}}  

 “I am the true vine, and My Father is the vinedresser. **2** Every branch in Me that does not bear fruit, He takes away; and every *branch* that bears fruit, He prunes it so that it may bear more fruit. **3** You are already clean because of the word which I have spoken to you. **4** Abide in Me, and I in you. As the branch cannot bear fruit of itself unless it abides in the vine, so neither *can* you unless you abide in Me. **5** I am the vine, you are the branches; he who abides in Me and I in him, he bears much fruit, for apart from Me you can do nothing. **6** If anyone does not abide in Me, he is thrown away as a branch and dries up; and they gather them, and cast them into the fire and they are burned. **7** If you abide in Me, and My words abide in you, ask whatever you wish, and it will be done for you. **8** My Father is glorified by this, that you bear much fruit, and *so* prove to be My disciples. **9** Just as the Father has loved Me, I have also loved you; abide in My love. **10** If you keep My commandments, you will abide in My love; just as I have kept My Father’s commandments and abide in His love. **11** These things I have spoken to you so that My joy may be in you, and *that* your joy may be made full.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

{{% /scripture %}}   

The crown of righteousness is the first crown for believers to attain. Those who receive it have grown to basic spiritual maturity by consistently taking in the truth of God’s Word, understanding, believing, and applying it. But we need to realize that not all believers will receive it because not all have (will have) attained such spiritual maturity. It is safe to say that many (if not most) believers throughout history have displayed very little zeal for God. However, even though many believers have and will never grow up in the fundamentals of the Christian life, they will still experience eternal life and all the joy that goes with it (which includes all the individual rewards they won while still alive), just as any of their other brothers and sisters in Christ (as long as they endure in their faith to the very end **1 Corinthians 15:2**). But based on our Lord’s evaluation of our present church era of Laodicea (**Revelation 3:14-22**), most believers today and in years past have been lukewarm (those who allow the cares, worries, and deceitfulness of the world and its wealth to stunt their growth to the harm of their spiritual advance **Luke 17:11-15**). 

On the other hand, the Tribulation will present opportunities for believers alive during that time to grow and advance in ways they had not been doing previously. The time of Jacob’s trouble (**Jeremiah 30:7**) will be a big wake-up call for all those who were initially little interested in spiritual growth. It won’t necessarily be too late for all these individuals to win the crowns of righteousness or life (depending). Needless to say, they should never have waited for divine discipline to force them to get serious (like a stubborn mule that “must be controlled by bit and bridle or they will not come to you” **Psalm 32:8-9**). 

The above does not imply that these individuals (the most lukewarm and least enthusiastic for Christ who hold fast to their faith) don’t grow at all (they do and must if their faith is going to survive). Instead, consistency is their main issue (they are inconsistent in taking in the truth, seeking it out, understanding, believing, and applying it). The crown of righteousness goes to those who attained consistency and maintained it for the rest of their lives. And I cannot forget to mention that spiritual growth, progress, and production can cooccur. Even new converts can pass occasional difficult tests of their faith and minister to God’s church right after getting saved. However, the severity and consistency of said tests will increase to a certain level only after they have grown to a certain point (nailing the basics down and maintaining said momentum). It is these individuals who are eligible for the crown of righteousness and are now ready for greater and more intense testing because they have completed their “basic training.”  

Recent converts to the faith need to grow to spiritual maturity before being ready to handle some of the most significant tests they will face. Job is an excellent example of this because it was an exceptional honor for him from the Lord to endure through all he did. We note that in **Job 1:8**, our Lord says of him to Satan, “*Have you considered my servant Job? There is no one on earth like him; he is blameless and upright, a man who fears God and shuns evil*.” Job already had previous growth experience to get to the level that he did. Otherwise, he would not have been ready for and able to endure through the tests God had for him (nor would he have been in for so much praise from God Himself). However, it is fair to say that, considering he was exceptionally strong in his faith among his countrymen and those of his generation, most believers in the past (with a few exceptions) and those today would not be able to handle such trying circumstances as this man of God did. So, it probably wouldn’t be a good idea to compare ourselves to him because we will quickly become demoralized. But that should be no cause of concern because, just like with temptation, the Lord will never test our faith beyond what it can handle. As Job’s example shows, God tests us relative to our faith.  

Finally, and before moving on, we should note in **2 Timothy 4:1-8** or anywhere else in the New Testament that Paul never asserts that he will receive any of the other two higher crowns of reward (even though he will), the crown of life and glory. The reason for this is in keeping with Paul’s humble character despite the fact he was probably the greatest of all the apostles (and even in that regard, he calls himself the least). 

{{% scripture p="1 Corinthians 15:9-10 (NASB 1995)" %}}  

**9** For I am the least of the apostles, and not fit to be called an apostle, because I persecuted the church of God. **10** But by the grace of God I am what I am, and His grace toward me did not prove vain; but I labored even more than all of them, yet not I, but the grace of God with me.                                                  

{{% /scripture %}}   

### **The Crown of Life- James 1:12**  

{{% scripture p="James 1:12 (ESV)" %}}  

**12** Blessed is the man who remains steadfast under trial, for when he has stood the test he will receive the crown of life, which God has promised to those who love him. 

{{% /scripture %}}   

The crown of life is the subject of our verse of study (the first half of the verse already explained earlier). The last part of our verse, “those who love him,” speaks of believers who stayed faithful till death and grew to basic spiritual maturity while having passed severe tests of their faith. As we have already mentioned, the crown of life goes to believers who have passed the far more difficult tests of life God has sent their way to grow their faith to another level (which makes them ready and prepared for more mature and consistent ministry). And, as we just said, prior spiritual growth and advancement were necessary to have gotten to said stage. This crown goes to those who not only got there but who have gone through and consistently passed these tests. Forward momentum must be sustained for life if ANY of these crowns are to be won (consistency is key). The high ground of spiritual progress (on whatever level for whatever stage) must be maintained till death (even though we will all have our failures throughout life). 

Therefore, winning any of the crowns of reward is impossible if prior advancement is not sustained. For example, it does no one any good to grow spiritually but then fall back into lukewarmness (**Revelation 3:14-22**) for the rest of their life thereafter. That is not to say all the good fruit they produced will be forgotten (it won’t) and left unrewarded in eternity (**Matthew 10:42**) (they will not lose their rewards). But they will not be eligible for any of the three crowns of reward (and won’t receive nearly as many eternal benefits as they could have because of all the wasted opportunities). The worst possible outcome for spiritual regression (if taken to the extreme) is apostasy (the complete death of faith; only believers are saved because removing faith takes away salvation **Ephesians 2:8-9**). Those who fall away will not have any share in eternal life **Hebrews 10:35-38**, **2 Peter 2:19-22**, **1 Corinthians 15:2**. 

### **The Crown of Glory- 1 Peter 5:4** 

{{% scripture p="1 Peter 5:4 (ESV)" %}}  

So I exhort the elders among you, as a fellow elder and a witness of the sufferings of Christ, as well as a partaker in the glory that is going to be revealed: **2** shepherd the flock of God that is among you, exercising oversight, not under compulsion, but willingly, as God would have you; not for shameful gain, but eagerly; **3** not domineering over those in your charge, but being examples to the flock. **4** And when the chief Shepherd appears, you will receive the unfading crown of glory.                                                                                 

{{% /scripture %}}    

The Greek word for elder is *presbyteros,* which means “old man.” However, the elders in this context are those who shepherd other believers. These leaders would be pastors-teachers responsible for teaching those under their charge. With that in mind, it is correct to say that a pastor-teacher can be younger or older (the gift of teaching and said ministry are not limited to older men). Biblically speaking, elders are pastor-teachers of various ages. If this were not so, then teaching would be a gift and ministry limited to older men only (something that a little spiritual common sense will tell us is not true). The same Greek word for elder in our verse (*presbyteros*) also appears in the passage below. **1 Timothy 5:17** mentions those who preach and teach, and what else could this refer to other than a pastor-teacher? The Bible uses the words “elder” and “overseer” as synonyms for teachers.  

{{% scripture p="1 Timothy 5:17 (NASB 1995)" %}}  

**17** The elders who rule well are to be considered worthy of double honor, especially those who work hard at preaching and teaching.                                         

{{% /scripture %}}    

{{% scripture p="1 Timothy 3:1-7 (NIV)" %}}  

Here is a trustworthy saying: Whoever aspires to be an **overseer** desires a noble task. **2** Now the **overseer** is to be above reproach, faithful to his wife, temperate, self-controlled, respectable, hospitable, able to teach, **3** not given to drunkenness, not violent but gentle, not quarrelsome, not a lover of money. **4** He must manage his own family well and see that his children obey him, and he must do so in a manner worthy of full respect. **5** (If anyone does not know how to manage his own family, how can he take care of God’s church?) **6** He must not be a recent convert, or he may become conceited and fall under the same judgment as the devil. **7** He must also have a good reputation with outsiders, so that he will not fall into disgrace and into the devil’s trap.                                                                              

{{% /scripture %}}    

Naturally, if the congregation is large enough, there will usually be multiple teachers (elders) to assist in feeding the flock (or perhaps only one if the group is small enough). However, only one usually takes charge of the primary duty of dispensing the truth. All have the gift of teaching, but only one can do most of the primary work (for multiple reasons). 

To continue examining our final crown of reward, all believers can win the crown of glory, not just pastor-teachers. It would make little sense to reserve specific rewards for individuals with particular gifts and ministries only (teaching in this case) because God never limits us according to our gifts, callings, or circumstances (all things out of our control). So, although we don’t get to choose our gifts or ministries (**1 Corinthians 12:7-11**), we do control how well we utilize what the Lord has given us. 

Our passage mentions elders as an example only for convenient and practical purposes (to save time and space) because Peter did not need to list multiple other types of ministries. The reader should understand that all believers who stay faithful to and complete the ministries assigned to them will win this crown. And when I say “complete,” I mean that, in God’s eyes, the quantity, quality, and duration of their work was satisfactory (even if no one carries out their spiritual duties perfectly). That is the crown of glory made possible by having become battle-tested through passing prior severe tests meant to strengthen and prepare faith for more and greater responsibilities. 

The context of **1 Peter 5** supports the above truth because it involves believers fulfilling their duties to God by helping others grow spiritually (with pastor-teachers used as only one example). Likewise, the context of **James 1:12** also confirms that the crown mentioned therein goes to those who remain steadfast through trials and tribulations (ones that had come upon those Jewish believers because they had prior growth experience under their belts). It stands to reason that the crown of righteousness mentioned in **2 Timothy 4:8** must be for those who have grown up to basic spiritual maturity (more advanced training is only for those who have advanced enough to undergo it). Therefore, the crown of righteousness would correspond to our spiritual growth, the crown of life to our spiritual progress, and the crown of glory to our spiritual production (the words growth, progress, and production are all loose words that I am not using as technical terms, of course).     

As mentioned, all three abovementioned processes can co-occur (and all three don’t stop until the Lord decides to take us home). Any believer (even a recent convert) can pass smaller tests of their faith and minister to others from day one while growing up to essential spiritual maturity (attained through consistently seeking out, understanding, believing, and applying the truth). But when it comes to the crown of glory, God has a more mature ministry or ministries for believers to fulfill as their primary service to Christ (we don’t grow or fully come into our spiritual gifts overnight). Without the prior processes of growth and progress, said individuals would be less qualified and prepared to help others because they need it themselves. That doesn’t mean we can or will ever be perfect or won’t continue to have our own struggles and weaknesses. What it does mean is that we are consistent in our general spiritual walk and battle-tested enough to be qualified to handle more work with greater responsibilities (**Luke 16:1-10**). What starts small eventually grows into something bigger. 

{{% scripture p="2 Corinthians 1:3-5 (ESV)" %}}  

**3** Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies and God of all comfort, **4** who comforts us in all our affliction, **so that we may be able to comfort those who are in any affliction**, **with the comfort with which we ourselves are comforted by God**. **5** For as we share abundantly in Christ's sufferings, so through Christ we share abundantly in comfort too.                                              

{{% /scripture %}}    



**References** 

All Greek words and definitions were taken from Bible Academy using Curtis Omo's lessons through the book of James. Prior permission for this was given to me by Curtis who clarified no need for citing him.  

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-NHHaXVo0uc&t=327s 
